
[Transcriber's note: Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts.
A list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has been added at
the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. V.--No. 126. SATURDAY, MARCH 27. 1852.

Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition, 5_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Pilgrimages to the Holy Land                               289

      Surnames                                                   290

      License to make Malt in 1596, by Julius Partrige           291

      Where Lollard was buried, and what became of his
      Bones                                                      292

      Dean Swift's Library                                       292

      Folk Lore:--Churching of Women--Wassailing Orchards
      in Sussex--Lucky Omens--Lambs--Key
      Experiments                                                293

      Minor Notes:--Rhymes connected with Places--French
      Dates--"Black Book of Scone"--Cracked Glass--Spanish
      Verses on the Invasion of England                          293

      QUERIES:--

      Legal Worthies, Queries respecting                         294

      Town Halls, by J. H. Parker                                295

      Minor Queries:--Chasseurs Britanniques--Knights Templars
      and Freemasons--St. Christopher--Arnold Bilson's
      Wife--Exeter Controversy--Education in the Time of
      Elizabeth--Sword swallowing--Livy quoted by
      Grotius--Eleanor, Lady of the Ring--Catalogue of
      Pictures--"Well bobbit, Blanch of Middleby"--Letter
      to a Brigadier-General--Dr. Fell--Grostete, Bishop
      of Lincoln--Almas-cliffe--Amyclæ--Cynthia's Dragon
      Yoke--London Genealogical Society--The Article "An"--Black
      Gowns and Red Coats--Coleridge's "Friend"--Wycherley's
      Verses on Plowden and Lady Sunderland                      295

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--"Salusbury Welsh Pedigree
      Book"--The Earl of Erroll--Heraldic--Family of
      Grey--Coinage of Richard III.--Edward Bagshaw--Couched,
      to couch--Marriage of Mrs. Claypole                        297

      REPLIES:--

      Original Letter of General James Wolfe                     298

      Earl of Chepstow                                           300

      Deaths from Fasting                                        301

      Burning Fern brings Rain                                   301

      The Fish called "Vendace"                                  302

      Macaronic Poetry                                           302

      Replies To Minor Queries:--Cooper's Miniatures of
      Cromwell--The Vellum-bound Junius--Sept--Many
      Children--Hog's Norton--Cromwell's Skull--Eliza
      Fenning--Hexameter on English Counties--Fairest Attendant
      of the Scottish Queen--Ecclesiastical Geography--Llandudno,
      on the Great Orme's Head--"Wise above that which is
      written"--Nightingale and Thorn--Friday at Sea--Latin
      Names of Towns--Gospel Trees--Gospel Oaks--"He that runs
      may read"--Wild Oats--Portrait of Mrs. Percy--Traditions
      of a Remote Period; the Chamberlaine Family--St.
      Bartholomew--John Rogers, Protomartyr; Descendants
      inquired for--English Translation of the Canons--"Arborei
      foetus alibi," &c.--Horn-blowing--"God's Love"--Plague
      Stones--Melody of the Dying Swan--Cimmerii--Stoke--King's
      College Chapel Windows--Quotation wanted--Showing
      the White Feather--John Lord Berkeley--History of
      Commerce--Game of Curling--Ancient Trees--Paring the
      Nails, &c.                                                 303

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               309

      Notices to Correspondents                                  310

      Advertisements                                             310




Notes.


PILGRIMAGES TO THE HOLY LAND.

In an article in the _Retrospective Review_ (2nd Series, vol. ii. p.
234.) it is stated that the first book ever printed concerning
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land was the _Peregrinatio Bernhardi de
Breydenbach_, Moguntiæ, 1486; and in the Preface to the _Pylgrymage of
Sir Richard Guylforde to the Holy Land in 1506_, lately published by the
Camden Society, the learned editor remarks that the work of Bernhard de
Breydenbach, _Opus transmarinæ Peregrinationis ad venerandum et
gloriosum Sepulchrum dominicum in Jherusalem_ (fol. Mogunt. 1486), is
believed to be the first book of travels that was printed. Having by me
notes of five works printed earlier than that of Breydenbach just
mentioned,--and all of these, with one exception, being Pilgrimages to
the Holy Land,--I forward them for publication in "N. & Q.," and
probably some of your correspondents may be able to add to the list.

1. _Ludolf von Suchen ("Ludolphus parochialis ecclesiæ in Suchen
rector"), De terra sancta et itinere Jhierosolymitano._--Three undated
editions, but in all probability printed before 1480, are mentioned in
Brunet's _Manuel du Libraire_. A German translation, entitled, _Von dem
gelobten Land vnd Weg gegen Iherusalem_, was published at Augsburg in
1477 in 4to. The author travelled about the year 1340. "His journal,"
observes Dr. Robinson (_Biblical Researches in Palestine_, iii. p. 11.),
"is written with great simplicity, and has something of the marvellous;
but is decidedly the best itinerary of the fourteenth century."

2. _Marco Polo_, the celebrated Eastern traveller, wrote an account of
his peregrinations in Italian, about the year 1300. A German translation
was printed at Nuremberg as early as 1477, with the following title:
_Hie hebt sich an das Puch des edeln Ritters vnd Landtfarers Marcho
Polo; in dem er schreibt die grossen wunderlichen Ding dieser Welt_. (In
folio.)

3. _Sir John Mandeville._ Both French and Italian editions of the
well-known "Marvaylous Travailes" of this worthy knight were printed in
1480. (See Brunet _ut supr._)

4. _Santo Brasca_, a gentleman of Milan, made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem
in 1480, of which he wrote a journal in Italian, and published it the
following year at Milan. Brunet gives the title as follows: _Tutto il
suo Itinerario di giorno in giorno al sanctissima cita di Jerusalem
nell' anno 1480_, 4to. This is a very curious and rare book, written in
simple and natural style; and at the end of which are "Instructioni a
ciascuno che desidra fare questo sanctissimo viagio," and two prayers in
verse: "1. Oratione per sancto brascha fatta a piedi nudi in Monte
Calvario a di 29 Julij, 1480: 2. Oratione facta in la vale de Josaphat a
la sepultura de la Vergene Maria."

5. _Johann_ or _Hans Tucher_, a counsellor (_Rathsherr_) of Nuremberg,
undertook a pilgrimage to Jerusalem and Mount Sinai in the year 1479, in
company with Balthasar, Duke of Mecklenburg, and two of his
fellow-citizens. The title of his itinerary in Brunet is, _Wallfart und
Reise in das gelobte Land_. Such was its popularity that it passed
through two editions in the same year (1482); the one appearing at
Augsburg, in folio; the other, corrected by the author, at Nuremberg, in
4to. (Vide Will's _Nürnbergisches Gelehrten-Lexicon_.) The work is,
however, very rare. In it full directions are given for the guidance of
all such as might thereafter be disposed to venture forth with scrip and
staff on these pious but somewhat perilous expeditions.

Referring again to Breydenbach, Dr. Kitto (no mean authority) is of
opinion that the account which goes under his name was written by the
Dominican monk Felix Faber, who was Breydenbach's secretary and
companion in the journey. (See Kitto's _Physical History of Palestine_,
p. 9.)

    PEREGRINE A.


SURNAMES.

The subject of surnames has more than once been referred to in the pages
of "N. & Q.," and it may assist those of your readers who have
investigated the question of their origin and use, to offer them the
following examples of peculiar forms of personal designation which occur
in certain of the more ancient public muniments of the city of Norwich.

It is the opinion of Camden, Du Cange, Pegge, Sharon Turner, and other
writers, that the custom of appropriating a permanent appellation to
particular families, became fully established in this country at the
period (sooner or later) of the Norman Conquest. The instances, however,
exhibited below, prove that such custom was not, at any rate,
universally prevalent at that time amongst us. And, indeed, whatever
might have been the case in reference to "the high men of the lond," it
is very certain that surnames, properly so called, were not completely
adopted by the mass of the people until the close of the fourteenth
century.

But as the intention of this Note is simply to adduce original examples
of individual designations, without inquiring into the circumstances
attending their acquisition, or pointing to the causes, obvious enough
for the most part, to which their various after-changes and
modifications are to be attributed, the subject calls for no other
general remark, except, perhaps, as to the prefixes "Le"[1] and "De,"
which, it may be noticed in passing, are, though not _constantly_, as is
commonly asserted, attached to names in records of an older date than
the time of Edward IV., when they began to fall into desuetude.

  [Footnote 1: This prefix was occasionally in Cheshire, and in the
  North with few exceptions, contracted into "A," as Thomas à
  Becket, Thomas à Dutton, &c.]

With these introductory observations are now given, from the source
above indicated,--

I. Examples of sons bearing a name different to that of their fathers:--

  "1230. Will. fil. Silvestri, als. Will. Silvestre, fil. Silvestri
  Pudding de Holmestrete;

  "1232. Joh. de Worthestede, Tannator, fil. Simonis le Spencer;

  "1239. Sim. Pellipar (Pelter, or Skinner), fil. Ranulph. le
  Furmag. de N.;

  "1242. Will. Pryse, fil. Clementis Mayne de N.;

  "1249. Walt. de Swathingg de N. Aurifaber, fil. Joh. de
  Birlingham;

  "1273. Rob. Leck, fil. Add. de Tifteshale;

  "---- Rad. fil. Willi de Castelaire (Castleacre) qui vocatur Rads.
  de Lenn (Lynn);

  "1333. Rycard de Byteringe, fil. Johis le Yunge (Ling), Ballior;

  "1334. Joh. del Stonhous, fil. Ad. de Storston, Clici, C. N.

  "1354. Willm. de Bernham, fil. Adam. del Sartyn defti."

Attention is requested to the last entry but one of this list; and it
may be further mentioned, in reference to it, that sub ann. 1270 occurs
this notice:

  "Adam _le Clerk_ de Stirston et Anger (?) _ux. ej._"

II. Examples of wives described by names other than those borne by their
husbands:

  "1255. Rob. de Wurthestede, et Basilia le Ro', ux. ej."

  1288. Will. de Devenschyr, le Wayte, et Alicia de Wetinge, ux. ej.

  1307. Johes Mengy de Besthorp, et Martha de Felmingham, ux. ej.

  ---- Thos. Toyth, et Juliana le Ropere, ux. ej.

  1316. Agnes Richeman (Rickman), Relicta Ric. Holveston defti.

  1318. Rob. de Poswyk, Taverner, et Alicia Godesman, ux. ej.

  1352. Isabell. de Mundham fuit ux. Willi de Dunston, et nunc uxor
  Simonis Spencer."

It is also to be noticed that wives, if more than once married, are
frequently described in old documents by the names, distinctly and
united, of their several husbands.

III. Examples of changes in the form of particular designations:

Between 1332 and 1348 the name borne by the famous knight, Sir Rob. de
Salle, commemorated by Froissart, and who was killed by the insurgents
near Norwich in 1381, is severally written, de la Sale, de Salle, de
Aula, de la S'aule, de Halle, Saul, and Halle.

In temps. Ed. II. and III. is the following name thus modified: Fitz
Benedict, Benediscite, Bendiste, Bendish, Bennett.

The twenty-ninth bishop of Norwich (1446-1472) is styled Walter Lyhart,
Le Hert, and Hart.

In 1337 we have "Jas. de Briseworth als. de Bliclingg;" and in 1368,
"Johes. de Welburn (Frat. Thome de Welburn nuper defti), als. de
Cobeslound de Welburne, Taverner."

Then, again, it were easy to produce innumerable examples of
professional and business descriptions, which have originated many
modern surnames, as Joh. le Lytester (Lister, Dyer), Regin, le Paumer
(Palmer), Bateman le Espicer, (Spicer), &c.

But this Note has already somewhat unduly encroached upon your pages;
and it is now brought to a conclusion with the single observation, that
many of the causes of various readings and differences of form in the
same original surname, as well as of a total change from one designation
to another, are now in full force and daily practical operation in many
isolated parts of the country, where, from the predominance of identical
family and baptismal appellations, some method, such as is illustrated
in the foregoing examples, must obviously be adopted, in order to
distinguish one individual from another. In many of the remote valleys,
indeed, of the North of England, a more comprehensive reply might be
given than that which the unsuccessful gaberlunyie woman, mentioned by
Sir W. Scott, received in a certain Scottish dale, when, in the
bitterness of her disappointment, she exclaimed, "Are there no
Christians here?" and was answered, "Christians! nae; we be a' Elliots
and Armstrongs!" So--but certainly not under like circumstances--it
might be replied, "We're a' Meccas (Ang. Metcalfes)!"

    COWGILL.

_Number of Surnames._--Probably some of your numerous correspondents
could give me some idea as to the number of surnames there are in this
country used by British subjects. We have no good work on surnames, as
those of Lower and others do not go sufficiently into the subject to
satisfy the curiosity of those who wish to know the origin and date of
the names in use among us. A work of some study and research, giving all
the names in use at present in the country, and showing when they were
first adopted or brought into the country, with the changes that have
been made in them, would be very interesting, and as worthy, if not more
so, than many that are brought before the public.

    J. H.

P.S.--I would suggest that the names should be classed in the different
periods of history, beginning with the Britons.


LICENSE TO MAKE MALT IN 1596.

Among the old family deeds relating to the manor of Wishanger, I find
the following curious and interesting document. It affords evidence that
in 1596 there was a dearth of corn which was general through the
kingdom; that barley was then much used for bread; that there was a
custom, either general, or occasioned by the scarcity, that the poor
should be served in open market, at an accustomed hour; that one of the
means relied upon to supply food to the people was to restrain the
making of malt; and, therefore, that malt liquor must have been very
generally consumed by our forefathers at that time.

The writing is in perfect preservation, and the ink jet black.

I give it in the original orthography, according to the literature of
those easy times when every man spelled that that was right in his own
eyes and the world was little troubled with dictionaries or critics.

    JULIUS PARTRIGE.

      Birmingham.

  "Glou'r.--Wee, her Ma'ts Justices of the Peace within this
  Countey, whose names are hereunder writen accordinge to the late
  orders publyshed by her Ma'tie and the Lo. of her most honorable
  privye Counsell for and concerninge the dearth of corne and
  graine, and for the better effectinge whereof we have taken
  recognizance of all such as shall make any malte, what quantitye
  they shall make, and where they shall buy it, and when, and to
  sell the same soe by them converted into malte in the open markett
  next unto them adioining, and for that none can soe doe without he
  be thereunto especially licenssed by us and p'esented by the Jury
  Have therefore licenssed and by these p'sents doe licensse the
  Bearer hereof Georg Fowler of Hibley to convert into Malte one
  quarter weekly and to buy the same Barley soe by him to be
  converted in the any the next Mkett Towne unto him adioininge and
  that one houre after the poor shall be served at the least.
  praying yo'se to whom it shall and may appertaine quietly to pmitt
  and suffer him soe to doe w'hout anye of yo'r lette interupcion or
  molestation the said Georg Fowler comitinge nothing to the hdance
  of our last orders only (these[2]) psnts in execution.

  "In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names the
  fourthe of December in the nine and thirtiethe year of the raigne
  of our Sovraigne lady Elizabethe by the grace of God of England
  Fraunce and Ireland Queene Defender of the ffaith A.D. 1596.

      "H. WINSTON.
      [*  *  *]
      [*  *  *]"

  [Footnote 2: The word "these" is not in the original; and two of
  the three signatures at foot are not readable.]


WHERE LOLLARD WAS BURIED, AND WHAT BECAME OF HIS BONES.

In referring to the passage of Heda's history relating to
bishop-boiling, the following curious fact caught my eye. Speaking of
the same bishop, Florentius de Wevelichoven, he says:

  "Fecit et exhumari ossa cujusdam hæretici Matthæi Lollaert atque
  ante atrium Pontificale comburi, cineresque in fossas urbis
  dispergi."--_Hist. Episcopor. Ultraject._ p. 259.

Now though the Christian name, _Matthæus_, of this Lollaert does not
agree with that usually assigned to Lollard, viz., _Walter_; nor yet
this assertion that his bones were dug up, and burned at Utrecht, with
the current story that Lollard was buried alive at Cologne; yet it is
evident from the note upon this passage on p. 263., that Heda is
speaking of the founder of the sect of the Lollards. In this note he
refers to Prateolus and Walsingham, to which I turned in order to
ascertain where he got his information; but, alas, in vain! They only
give a very meagre account of the origin of the Lollards. Heda must
therefore have had some independent source from which he wrote, as he
could hardly have invented the story. The form of name, _Lollaert_,
would make it more than probable that Lollard was a Dutchman, which
agrees very well with the account that he preached in Germany.

How much is it to be wished that some member of the many learned Dutch
Antiquarian Societies now in existence, would endeavour _at last_ to
clear up the history of Lollard by reference to the records of the city
of Utrecht, if they are still in being, and extend so far back as the
fourteenth century.

Florentius became Bishop of Utrecht in 1379, and died 1394.

    J. B. MCC.

  British Museum.


DEAN SWIFT'S LIBRARY.

The letters and other MSS. of Dr. John Lyon, who was prebendary at
Rathmichael, in the archdiocese of Dublin, between the years 1755 and
1764, by some chance or another recently got into the possession of a
shopkeeper in this city, by whom they have been, for the most part, used
as waste paper. The originals from which the following transcripts have
been made, are now in my possession.

      "_The Booksellers' Certificate._

  "We the undernamed have examined and considered ye Catalogue of ye
  late Dr. Swift's Books, to which we find were added Dr. Wilson's
  Books. The whole is done with great exactness, and correctly
  printed. And in consideration that ye Gentleman who made and
  corrected ye said Catalogues not only pieced and numbered all ye
  said Books, but examined them also leaf by leaf, in order to
  distinguish those with a Star in ye Printed Catalogues that were
  noted and observed upon by Dr. Swift; which added very much to
  rise ye value of ye said Books at ye time of Sale, as may be seen
  by ye Prices paid for many of them. We are of opinion that ye
  Gentleman who took all ye trouble above mentioned did deserve to
  be paid one shilling per Pound upon ye sale of ye said Books.
  Given under our hands this 26 day of January 1749.

      "George Faulkner.
      John Torbuek.

      "Mr. Walker's Charge and profit upon ye Sale, as he
          returned it to ye Exec'rs.
                                                       £   _s._ _d._
      "The whole, both Dr. Swift's and
           Dr. Wilson's Books, sold for              270    0    0
                                                     --------------
      For ye Catalogues and Sale of w'ch
          Mr. Walker charged                          27    0    0
      Deduct 1_s._ per pd. for forming ye
          Catalogues and marking ye Books             13   10    0
                                                     --------------
                                                     £13   10    0
        Mr. Walker paid for printing
            ye Catalogue about           £3    5
        The Auctioneer ought to
            have had only 6_d._ per pd.
            viz.                          6   15
        Charge for a Clerk and Fire       0   15
                                         -------
                                         £10  15      10   15    0
                                                      --------------
                                                      £2   15    0
      Because Mr. Walker was imposed upon
          by his Auctioneer, I am willing to
          allow him £5 10_s._ out of my proportion
          of £13 10_s._, viz.                          5   10    0
                                                     --------------
      Walker ought to have this Balance
          clear, if he was not deceived
          by ye man he imployed                        8    5    0

  "Rockfield, Fryday Ev'g.

  "Lord Shelburne's compliments to Doct'r Lyons, and has many thanks
  to return to him for his Incomparable Present of Dr. Burnet's
  _History_, the property of Dean Swift. It has been his daily
  Intention to wait upon Doct'r Lyons, but has been prevented by the
  attention which his private affairs have required. He is just
  return'd from the Co. Meath. Lady Arabella Denny joins Lord
  Shelburne in requesting the favour of D'r Lyons' company to-morrow
  to Dinner, at Peafield, near the Black Rock. L'd S. embarks on
  Sunday. [Sept'r 1770.]"

    J. F. F.

  Dublin.


FOLK LORE.

_Churching of Women._--In Herefordshire it is considered _contra bonos
mores_ for the husband to appear in church on the day of his wife's
churching, or, at all events, in the same pew with her. An antiquary of
that county considers this a relic of Roman paganism, connected with the
worship of Bona Dea. Query, is this so elsewhere?

    C. S. P.

_Wassailing Orchards in Sussex._--I am happy to be able to send you the
following particulars respecting the apple-tree superstitions, as they
prevail in this county; and it is as _well to preserve_ the
_recollection_ of them, for I suspect they are wearing away. In this
neighbourhood (Chailey) the custom of wassailing the orchards still
remains. It is called apple-howling. A troop of boys visit the different
orchards, and encircling the apple-trees they repeat the following
words:

      "Stand fast root, bear well top,
      Pray the God send us a good howling crop.
      Every twig, apples big,
      Every bough, apples enow.
      Hats full, caps full,
      Full quarters, sacks full."

They then shout in chorus, one of the boys accompanying them on the
cow's horn; during this ceremony they rap the trees with their sticks.
This custom is alluded to in Herrick's _Hesperides_, p. 311.

      "Wassail the trees that they may beare
      You, many a plum, and many a peare,
      For more or less fruits they will bring,
      As you do give them _wassailing_."

    R. W. B.

_Lucky Omens._--"The schoolmaster with his primer in his hand," to quote
Lord Brougham, is unquestionably abroad, and dispelling, with surprising
rapidity, the prejudices of the people; in some cases, perhaps, to make
way for prejudices yet stronger and more tenacious than those they
displace. You are doing good service by collecting and recording some of
those that are fast disappearing. In this neighbourhood I know ladies
who consider it "lucky" to find _old iron_; a horse shoe or a rusty nail
is carefully conveyed home and hoarded up. It is also considered lucky
if you see the _head_ of the first lamb in spring; to present his _tail_
is the certain harbinger of misfortune. It is also said that if you have
money in your pocket the first time you hear the cuckoo, you will never
be without all the year. The magpie is a well-known bird of omen. The
following lines were familiar when I was a boy:

      "One for sorrow, two for mirth,
      Three for a wedding, four for death;
      Five for a fiddle, six for a dance,
      Seven for England, eight for France."

    T. D.

_Lambs._--The Denbighshire peasantry watch with great anxiety for the
position in which young lambs are seen by them the first time in the
year. If their heads are towards them it is lucky; if their tails, great
misfortunes will ensue.

    AGMOND.

_Key Experiments_ (Vol. v., p. 152.).--Perhaps J. P. Jun. may not be
aware that an experiment somewhat similar to these is practised in the
Isle of Man. The operator holds a thread between the finger and thumb,
with a shilling fixed horizontally to it, gradually drops the shilling
into a glass, and after it has once become stationary, the shilling
begins to oscillate, and, as the superstition goes, invariably strikes
the hour of the day against the glass. I have frequently practised it,
and consider the motive power to be the pulse, which is completely under
the operator's control. This performance has been known in the Isle of
Man certainly more than a century, and bears a resemblance to the
experiments of Mayo and Reichenbach with the Od Force, or the vagaries
of the Magnetoscope.

Perhaps some of your correspondents can instance cases and tricks of
this kind of much earlier date.

    AGMOND.


Minor Notes.

_Rhymes connected with Places._--There are many villages in England, the
names of which have old traditionary couplets attached to them,
illustrating some natural or other peculiarity; some such have already
incidentally found their way into the pages of "N. & Q." Might not a
complete collection be easily made, and would it not be an interesting
one? I send, as a beginning, two Staffordshire villages in my immediate
neighbourhood, which are very characteristically described. One is--

      "Wootton under Weaver,
      Where God came never,"

being very lonely, and out-of-the-way; and the other--

      "Stanton on the stones,
      Where the Devil broke his bones,"

which explains itself.

    W. FRASER.

_French Dates._--I annex a singular connexion between the dates of some
of the most important occurrences in the history of France, which was
mentioned to me by a French lady, with whom I had the pleasure of
travelling from Soissons to Paris the day after the melancholy death of
the Duke of Orleans, in July 1842. By following out the same principle
of addition, the next great national event appears to be in store for
the year 1857. Of course the superstitious reader must shut his eyes on
1848.

      1794 - Period of Robespierre.
         1
         7
         9
         4
      ----
      1815 - Waterloo.
         1
         8
         1
         5
      ----
      1830 - Revolution.
         1
         8
         3
         0
      ----
      1842 - Death of the Duke of Orleans.

    E. N.

"_Black Book of Scone._"--The _Black Book of Scone_, containing the
history of Scotland from Fergus I., was in Sir Robert Spottiswood's
library, and was given by Lewis Cant (a Covenanting minister) to
Major-General Lambert, and by Lambert to Col. Fairfax; which book
Charles I. had ransomed from Rome by a considerable sum of money: and it
is certain Archbishop Spottiswood had it and the _Black Book of
Paisley_, signed by three abbots, when he compiled his _History_, which,
with the famous _Red Book of Pluscardine_, Buchanan says he had, and
frequently cites.--Sir George Mackenzie's _Defence of the Antiquity of
the Royal Line of Scotland_; and also _Lives of Scotch Writers_.

The fate of the _Black Book of Scone_ may be a clue to the inquirer
after the _Black Book of Paisley_. It is not now in the library at
Spottiswood; and most of Sir Robert Spottiswood's property was pillaged
and ransacked during his imprisonment.

    L. M. M. R.

_Cracked Glass._--Some years ago, being a schoolboy at the time, I spent
my Christmas holidays at my grandfather's house in Somersetshire. The
members of the family were assembled for evening prayer, when suddenly
music, resembling that of an Æolian harp, was heard, produced apparently
by some person upon the lawn immediately beneath the window. As soon as
the prayers were concluded I opened the hall door, and was greatly
surprised to find the musician had departed. On returning to the
drawing-room I was informed that the moment I had left the room the
music ceased. Believing that some village friend had come to serenade
us, we drew our chairs round the fire in expectation of his return. A
few minutes only elapsed when the music was again distinctly heard. A
second visit was made to the hall door, but with no better success. It
was then resolved to open the shutters, which was no sooner done than
the mystery was clearly explained. During the day a pane of glass had
been cracked, and the music was produced by the two pieces of glass
vibrating against each other. We found, from repeated experiments, that
it required the atmosphere of the room to be at rather a high
temperature to produce the effect, for the moment the door, or one of
the other windows, was opened, the vibration ceased. I have only to add
that the music was very pleasing to the ear, and consisted of rapid
cadences. I have often mentioned the circumstance, but I never found any
one who had met with a similar _musical fracture_.

    M. A.

_Spanish Verses on the Invasion of England._--I carry in my memory the
following verses. Are they to be found in any Spanish canzonero? I
certainly have not invented them.

      "Mi hermano Bartolo
      Va in Inglatierra
      A mater et Draque
      Y a tomar la reyna.
      Y de los Luteranos
      De la banda-messa
      Tiene a traer mi
      A mi de la guerra
      Un Luteranico
      Con una cadena
      Y una Luterana."
      .  .  .  .

Here my memory fails me.

    L. H. J. T.




Queries.


LEGAL WORTHIES, QUERIES RESPECTING.

I shall be much obliged for any information or hints as to the following
Queries:--

1. Is there any list extant of the Prothonotaries of the Supreme Courts
of Judicature from the time of Edward III. downwards, or any source from
which their names could be obtained? Was John Hayward a prothonotary of
one of the courts in Edward III.'s time, or during the reign immediately
following? or can any information be furnished about a lawyer of that
name about that time?

2. Is anything known of a place called "Schypmen Hall" existing in
London or elsewhere in the time of Edward IV.?

3. When did "Mr. Goldsborough, one of the Prothonotaries of the Common
Banke," flourish?

4. Is anything known of Traherne, said to have been reader at Lincoln's
Inn temp. Hen. VIII., whose _Reading on Forest Laws_ is much referred to
by Manwood?

5. Is anything known of Frowick, a lawyer probably of the sixteenth
century?

    C. W. G.


TOWN HALLS.

I have to thank two of your correspondents for their Notes in answer to
my Query respecting mediæval towns built on a regular plan in England.
They have reminded me of Hull and Wokingham, with both which places I
was previously acquainted; neither of them is by any means of the same
regular and perfect plan as the English towns in France, but they
approximate to it in some degree; and I am not the less obliged for
being reminded of them. My success in this instance encourages me to
trouble you with another Query. Can any of your correspondents furnish
me with information respecting any mediæval town halls remaining in
England? I am acquainted with several, but believe there are many more
than is commonly supposed. Some of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
are mentioned in Mr. Turner's work on _Domestic Architecture_, as the
County Hall at Oakham; the Guildhall at Lincoln; the King's Hall at
Winchester. In addition to these, the Guildhall at Exeter is partly of
the thirteenth century, and partly of the fifteenth. The old Town Hall
at Colchester of the twelfth has, I believe, been destroyed within these
few years. The Town Hall at Winchelsea is of the time of Edward I.,
though mutilated. The Town Hall at Aldborough is of the fifteenth
century, or earlier. The hall of St. Mary's Guild at Coventry is a
well-known and beautiful example. The Town Hall of Weobly in
Herefordshire is, if I remember rightly, an early example of timber
work. These are a few instances which occur to my memory. I have no
doubt there are many others; and, as the subject is one of considerable
interest, perhaps you will not object to assist me in collecting
information upon it. You will observe that I include under the general
name of Town Halls all public halls, whether called by that name or by
any other. I am aware that they do not all belong to the same class,
strictly speaking; but I should be glad to know of other examples of any
of them.

    J. H. PARKER.

  Oxford.


Minor Queries.

_Chasseurs Britanniques._--This regiment is noticed under the head of
"Foreign Corps on English half-pay," in the _Army List_ for 1850-1, pp.
494. 530. Can any of your readers favour me with some particulars
regarding it, and when and where it was raised, &c.?

    E. N.

_Knights Templars and Freemasons._--Can any of your readers inform me
what connexion has ever existed between the Knights Templars and the
Freemasons, as there is a degree in Freemasonry called the Knight
Templar's degree? It is supposed that the persecuted Templars betook
themselves to the Freemasons' lodges, and secured their protection. The
two orders became closely connected, the succession of Grand Masters
kept up, and the ritual of the Templars preserved. There is a French
order of Knights Templars, which claims direct succession from Jacques
de Molay, the last Grand Master of the original order; but the
Freemasons say that this is a spurious body, and that the only
legitimate claimants to representation of this once powerful order are
the Freemasons.

I shall be glad if any of your readers can give such information as may
aid my inquiries into this subject; or if they can furnish me with the
titles of such works as are most likely to aid my researches. My object
is to trace the history of the order of Knights Templars subsequent to
the persecution and death of Jacques de Molay, and to ascertain the
correctness of the statements of those who profess to be the proper
representatives of the order.

    E. A. H. L.

_St. Christopher._--Can any of the readers of "N. & Q." supply any
information which will assist my researches into the real meaning of the
representations of St. Christopher, which are so frequently found on the
north walls of churches? I have read Mr. Duke's essay on the subject in
the _Prolusiones Historicæ_, but do not quite agree in his view of the
meaning which these singular paintings were intended to convey. Why
should this saint, of whom so little is correctly known and of whom
Alban Butler gives a very scanty account, occupy such a very important
position in the iconography of the mediæval church, and which it appears
has not been maintained by the Roman Catholics of the present day? I am
quite aware of the doggrel lines occasionally found underneath these
representations, ascribing extraordinary powers of cure to the picture
when looked upon by the faithful; but I cannot think that this reason
alone would have led to the adoption of this extraordinary
representation in almost all our parish churches. Are there any known
representations of St. Christopher in painted glass; if so, where?

    E. A. H. L.

_Arnold Bilson's Wife._--Can any of your readers inform me who was "the
daughter of the house of Bavaria" married to _Arnold Bilson_,
great-grandfather of Thomas Bilson, Bishop of Winchester (who died
1616); and under what circumstances the marriage took place?

It seems there was some romance in the case, as, according to memorandum
(_Lib. Coll. Arm._, c. 19. p. 48., and _Harl. MS._ 1101. p. 29. [1582]),
the arms granted by the duke to his son-in-law were--"azure, per pole, a
rose and thistle, pper;" crest, "a horn, or." This union of what I
apprehend to be the royal and plebeian flowers, would seem to indicate
that the husband was merely a "roturier;" and, indeed, the "horn" itself
may point to his occupation, as it is the simple hunting instrument of
the time.

Arnold Bilson after his marriage left Germany, and settled in England.

    T. C.

_Exeter Controversy._--W. Gifford, in his _Autobiography_, says, that
the shoemaker to whom he was bound apprentice "was a Presbyterian, whose
reading was entirely confined to the small tracts published on the
_Exeter Controversy_."--Transl. of _Juvenal_, ed. 2. p. x. What
controversy, and whose, was that?

    A. N.

_Education in the Time of Elizabeth._--What means were employed in the
time of Queen Elizabeth for the education of the people? Were there any
schools at that time, such as we have now, for the education of the
lower classes? Or was it confined chiefly to the higher orders of
society?

    JAMES COE.

  Manchester.

_Sword Swallowing._--If some one of your learned correspondents could
point out any other references to the useful accomplishment of sword
swallowing, the information would confer a favour on me. The reference
to which I allude is about the date of B.C. 326, and is, unless my
memorandum be inaccurate, _Plu. Lycur._ c. 19, and runs thus:

      "Ἄγις μὲν οὖν ὁ βασιλεὺς, σκώπτοντος Ἀττικοῦ τινὸς,
      τὰς Λακωνικὰς μαχαίρας εἰς τὴν μικρότητα καὶ λέγοντος,
      ὅτι ῥᾳδίως αὐτὰς οἱ θαυματοποιοὶ καταπίνουσιν ἐν τοῖς
      θεάτροις, Καὶ μὴν μάλιστα, εἶπεν, ἡμεῖς ἐφικνούμεθα τοῖς
      ἐγχειριδίοις τῶν πολεμίων."

    ÆGROTUS.

_Livy quoted by Grotius._--Grotius, in his _Commentary_ on Matt. v. 13.,
gives as a parallel passage to "τὸ ἅλις τῆς γῆς," the
following quotation from Livy: "Græcia sal gentium." Can any of your
correspondents inform me where in Livy this passage occurs?

    T. K. R.

_Eleanor, Lady of the Ring._--In a family pedigree I find--

  "Eleanor, lady of the ringe, daughter and heir of Thomas Ddu,
  married John, first cousin of William Herbert, first earl of
  Pembroke."

What is the meaning of the sobriquet "Lady of the ringe?"

    W. R. D. S.

_Catalogue of Pictures._--Some information is requested of an octavo
volume of 252 pages, being a catalogue of a collection of pictures
consigned to Mr. Samuel Pawson, wine merchant in Cecil Street, Strand,
without date or name, or residence of printer; it contains succinct
annotations "of the several masters whose performances are herewith
exhibited." These are very curious, and the prices affixed to each
picture (800 in number), as added together by some possessor of the
volume, amount to 55,379_l._ It appears to have been highly esteemed;
and, amongst other autographs, has "J. P. Roberts, Kingsgate;" "J. P.
Powell, Quex park."

    E. D.

"_Well bobbit, Blanch of Middleby._"--Can any one tell me where I can
hear of an old tune which was well known in my father's early days,
called "Well bobbit, Blanch of Middleby?" I can now find no trace of it.

    L. M. M. R.

_Letter to a Brigadier-General._--If Thomas Lord Lyttelton wrote the
_Letters of Junius_, who was the author of the _Letter to a
Brigadier-General_, published in 1760? This letter is now very generally
believed to have been written by Junius, when Thomas Lyttelton was about
_fourteen_ years old!

    W. C.

_Dr. Fell._--Can any one inform me who the author of the following lines
is, and their original application:--

      "I do not like thee, Dr. Fell,
      The reason why I cannot tell;
      But this I know full rarely well,
      I do not like thee, Dr. Fell."

    J. N. C.

_Grostete, Bishop of Lincoln._--Dibdin, in his _Northern Tour_, vol. i.
p. 97., says of this distinguished prelate:

  "We may anticipate the portrait of this truly great man drawn to
  the life in the intended biography of my friend Mr. Willson."

Dibdin published this in 1838. Has the memoir of Grostete ever appeared?

I may add, as a pendant to this Query, that two years back I saw a
beautiful English MS. of Grostete's on vellum, at the library of the
English College at Douay, out of which some British traveller, to whom
it had been obligingly lent, had cut every one of the illuminations.

    O. T. D.

_Almas-cliffe._--During a brief sojourn at Harrogate, Yorkshire, I have
visited two remarkable groups of rock, locally known as _Great
Almas-cliffe_ and _Little Almas-cliffe_: the former crowning a lofty
ridge about five miles south-west of this place; and the latter standing
upon a wild, heathery moorland, about three miles north of the other.
Both command most extensive views; and, on the table-rock of each, I
noticed circular basins, with channels by which superfluous fluid may be
carried off. Tradition says, that in remote ages they were used as
druidical altars; and, that in later days, after the introduction of
Christianity into England, mass was occasionally celebrated upon them.
In some of the local guide-books they are called _Almias_ Cliff. Whence
is the name derived? Can it be a corruption of holy mass, or hallowmas?

    G. H. of S.

  Harrogate.

_Amyclæ._--What special ordinance of taciturnity had the burghers of
Amyclæ?

    MORTIMER COLLINS.

_Cynthia's Dragon Yoke._--

      "While Cynthia checks her dragon yoke,
      Gently o'er the accustom'd oak."

Can any of your correspondents inform me to what classical writer, or to
what source, Milton is indebted for Cynthia's "dragon yoke?"

    H. T. P. Boston, Massachusetts, U. S. A.

_London Genealogical Society._--Will you, or one of your correspondents,
oblige a subscriber with information as to the above society? Is it in
existence, and has it published any of its works, and how obtainable?

    W. P. A.

_The Article "An."_--It is asserted that the article _an_ is prefixed
before six words only that begin with the letter _h_. Is _hospital_ one
of them? The others are, I believe, _heir_, _honest_, _honour_, _hotel_,
_humble_.

    NIL NEMINI.

  Tunbridge Wells.

"_Black Gowns and Red Coats._"--Can any of your readers give me any
information about a poem called "Black Gowns and Red Coats?" It is a
satire on Oxford, which was published in 1834, at the time of the Duke
of Wellington's installation as Chancellor; but the satire was so
severe, that it was at once suppressed. The author is said to be dead; I
should like to know something of the circumstances of its publication,
for I had once seen it, and it bore the marks of very great genius. If
any one has a copy to dispose of, I would gladly buy it.

    S. F. C.

  Oxford.

_Coleridge's "Friend."_--Who is the person alluded to in the following
note in Coleridge's _Friend_, 1st edition, No. 8. Oct. 5, 1809, p. 124.?

  "He is gone, my friend, my munificent co-patron, and not less the
  benefactor of my intellect! he who, beyond all other men known to
  me, added a fine and ever-wakeful sense of Beauty to the most
  patient accuracy in Experimental Philosophy and the profounder
  researches of Metaphysical Science," &c.

    J. M.

_Wycherley's Verses on Plowden and Lady Sunderland._--In Phillips and
Herbert's _History of Shrewsbury_, pages from 263 to 266, vol. ii. 4to.
1837, giving an account of the ancient family of the Plowdens, and their
claim to the barony of Dudley, allusion is made to a passage in Baker's
_History of Northamptonshire_ respecting some comic verses of the poet
Wycherley on Plowden, of Plowden Hall, and the Countess of Sunderland. I
cannot find these verses in Wycherley's _Works_ in the British Museum.
Can any of your readers inform me where they are to be found? Baker
seems to allude to them as being well known in his time.

    ALBION.


Minor Queries Answered.

"_Salusbury Welsh Pedigree Book._"--Having sometimes occasion to
investigate the lineage of Irish families derived from Wales, I am very
anxious to learn, through your valuable oracle, where may now be that
genealogical collection. According to the notes I have of it, it
contained "the pedigrees of all the gentlemen in North Wales, and of
some adjacent counties, with their arms finely illuminated;" and took
its name from the compiler, John Salusbury, Esq., of Erbistock, who
lived about the middle of the seventeenth century, and is reported as
having executed the labour with great accuracy. Does its actual scope
justify the above description, and where is it now? About the year 1780
it was in the possession of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, the very surname
on which I am at present engaged.

    JOHN DALTON.

  48. Summer Hill, Dublin.

  [In all probability, the present Sir W. W. Wynn could give some
  information upon the subject if applied to.]

_The Earl of Erroll._--I have somewhere seen it stated, that in virtue
of his distinguished office as Great Constable of Scotland, which was
granted to his ancestry by King Robert Bruce, in 1312, his lordship is
by birth the first subject in Scotland; and in right of this privilege,
on all state occasions, where the sovereign is present, appears at his
or her right hand, and takes precedence of the entire peerage of
Scotland. Is it so?

    PETROPROMONTORIENSIS.

  [His Lordship cannot be by _birth_ entitled to precede the whole
  peerage of Scotland, though as Lord High Constable, when attending
  the sovereign, he may have that precedence.]

_Heraldic._--A friend has sent me the following Note "from a local
paper:"

  "In the hall, Fawsley, Northamptonshire, is an escutcheon,
  containing no less than 334 quarterings."

Can any of your correspondents verify this statement, or refer me to any
other example of so full a blazonry?

    W. SPARROW SIMPSON, B.A.

  [The shield is probably that of _Knightley_, whose quarterings are
  very numerous. We do not know where to refer our querist to an
  emblazoned shield, but there are other families whose quarterings
  would be as numerous, viz. _Howard Percy_, and Brydges Chandos,
  Duke of Buckingham, &c.]

_Family of Grey._--Thomas, second Marquess of Dorset, had four sons;
Henry, Thomas, Leonard, and John. Henry was created Duke of Suffolk, and
was with his two brothers, Thomas and Leonard, beheaded in 1555, for
taking part in Sir Thomas Wyatt's rebellion. John was ancestor of the
Earl of Stamford. The Queries I wish to make are, were Thomas and
Leonard, or either of them, married? If they were, what were the _names_
of their wives, and did they leave issue? And most particularly did
Thomas?

    C. DE D.

  [Thomas, the second brother of the Marquess of Dorset, married and
  left a daughter and heir, Margaret, wife of John Ashley, Esq.,
  Master of the Jewels to Queen Elizabeth, and she left issue.
  Edward, the third son, died _s.p._ Some pedigrees call Edward
  _Leonard_, but upon what authority does not appear.]

_Coinage of Richard III._--Is the mint mark of the cross to be found on
any of the coins of Richard III. struck at London? I am aware that it is
to be found on pieces from the country mints; but on metropolitan coins
his heraldic cognizance (the boar's head) is the more usual, if not the
only mark impressed.

    RICHARD F. LITTLEDALE.

  Dublin.

  [We are not aware that the cross occurs as a _mint mark_ on the
  coins of Richard III., either of the London or provincial mints.
  If our correspondent has a coin of Richard III., with the plain
  cross on the reverse for M. M., the probability is that it is
  struck from the die of a reverse of Edward IV., on whose coins it
  does occur.]

_Edward Bagshaw._--Can any of your correspondents inform me whether Sir
Edward Bagshaw, of Finglas, near Dublin, who settled in Ireland about
the commencement of the seventeenth century, left other children besides
two daughters; one of whom married William, eldest son of Sir William
Ryves, and by him had issue Bagshaw, William, Thomas, and Francis Ryves,
together with a daughter married to a Captain Burrowes? I also wish to
ascertain whether Castle Bagshaw, co. Cavan, the seat of the late Sir
William Burroughs, derives its name from this branch of the family of
Bagshaw. Any information, genealogical or historical, concerning the
above Sir Edward Bagshaw, would be acceptable.

    W. B.

  Cambridge.

  [This statement does not appear quite correct. Thomas Ryves, the
  second son of William, is said to have married Jane, daughter of
  Captain Burrows. See Hutchins's _Dorset_, vol. iii. p. 366., ped.
  of _Ryves_.]

_Couched, to couch._--What is the earliest example of the use of this
word in the sense of "to embody," thus: "he _couched_ his thoughts in
excellent language?" Johnson cites Dryden and Atterbury as authorities
for the word, which, _me judice_, ought to be banished from the English
dictionary, since we have several older and more expressive terms of
synonymous import.

    MARK ANTONY LOWER.

  [In Baret's _Alvearie_ (1580) we find the meanings of the word
  _couch_, "The knitting and couching of wordes in talke--Sermonis
  compositio.--_Quintil._ To joine and couch--componere et
  coagmentare verba.--_Cic._" In Cotgrave, "mettre par escrit" is
  explained, to "couch in writing:" and in Phillips' _World of
  Words_, couch is defined "to comprehend, or comprise." These are
  somewhat analogous uses of the word.]

_Marriage of Mrs. Claypole._--What was the date of the marriage of
Oliver Cromwell's daughter with Mr. Claypole? Any one giving a Note in
reply to this Query, will much oblige

    B. N.

  [Noble, vol. ii. p. 375., says that Claypole "in 1645-6 was
  married to Mary, the second and most favoured daughter of Oliver
  Cromwell, then of Ely in Cambridgeshire, Esquire."]




Replies.


ORIGINAL LETTER OF GENERAL JAMES WOLFE.

(Vol. v., pp. 34. 136. 185.)

I beg to renew my acknowledgments to the various gentlemen who have
afforded additional information respecting this brave man. So little has
been recorded of his personal history, that every item which can be
gleaned is valuable. It is certainly strange that no proper memoir of
one so distinguished in arms as Wolfe has yet been written. His career,
though short, was brilliant and embraces a period of time, as well as
events, which would render a sketch of his life, by a competent writer,
singularly interesting. Materials do not seem wanting; the detached
pieces of information, and references to sources where more may be
obtained, which have already appeared in "N. & Q." since I ventured to
start the subject in October last, indicate, that with a little industry
and research in proper quarters, Wolfe's history can yet be written to
advantage. England's young hero has, in this respect, been too much
neglected. Surely this national reproach will not be allowed to
continue.

In the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for January last, there is a very
interesting letter from Wolfe to a young officer on the subject of
military studies, supplied from the rich MS. stores of Mr. Robert Cole.
I am enabled to contribute the fragment of another letter from Wolfe,
also to a very young officer, pointing out how he ought to conduct
himself on entering the army. This fragment was discovered within these
few weeks, in the same old military chest where the twelve letters in
my possession were found, to which I formerly alluded. This fragment,
though neither dated, signed, nor addressed, is in Wolfe's handwriting
beyond all doubt. I have compared it with his other letters, and not
only do I find the resemblance perfect, but the paper on which the
fragment is written is identically the same with several of these
letters, the water-mark being the very appropriate one for a soldier,
"pro _patria_." This newly discovered portion of Wolfe's letter is
written closely on two pages of a sheet of post paper; and from
circumstances I am inclined to think the date must have been in the end
of 1757, when he was at Blackheath, soon after his return from the
descent on Rochefort, in which he held a command. I am unable, however,
to point out the name of the young officer for whose advantage the
fragmentary epistle was written; but he was evidently one in whose
welfare Wolfe took much interest, and intimate in Wolfe's family. The
introductory words, "_Dear Huty_," seem to be an affectionate
abbreviation of the young gentleman's surname; but how the fragment came
amongst the papers of Wolfe's other friend, Lieut.-Col. Rickson, to whom
the whole of the twelve letters in my possession are addressed, I cannot
at present say. Here is an exact copy, viz.:

  "Dear Huty,

  "By a Letter from my Mother I find you are now an officer in Lord
  Chs. Hay's Regiment, which I heartily give you Joy of, and as I
  sincerely wish you success in Life, you will give me Leave to give
  you a few Hints which may be of use to you in it. The Field you
  are going into is quite new to you, but may be trod very safely,
  and soon made known to you, if you only get into it by the proper
  Entrance. I make no doubt but you have entirely laid aside the Boy
  and all Boyish amusements, and have considered yourself as a young
  man going into a manly profession, where you must be answerable
  for your own conduct. Your character in life must be that of a
  Soldier, and a Gentleman: the first is to be acquired by
  application and attendance on your duty; the second, by adhering
  most strictly to the Dictates of Honour, and the Rules of Good
  Breeding. To be more particular in each of these points; when you
  join your Regiment, if there are any Officer's Guard mounted, be
  sure constantly to attend the Parade, observe carefully the manner
  of the officers taking their Posts, the exercise of their
  Espontoon, &c.; when the Guard is marched off from the Parade,
  attend it to the Place of Relief, and observe the manner and form
  of Relieving, and when you return to your chamber (which should be
  as soon as you cou'd, lest what you saw slip out of your Memory),
  consult Bland's Military Discipline on that Head; this will be the
  readiest method of learning this part of your Duty, which is what
  you will be the soonest call'd on to perform.

  "When off Duty get a Serg't or a Corporal, whom the Adjutant will
  recommend to you, to teach you the Exercise of the Firelock, which
  I beg of you to make yourself as much master of as if you were a
  simple soldier; the exact and nice knowledge of this will readily
  bring you to understand all other parts of your Duty, make you a
  proper judge of the performance of the Men, and qualify you for
  the post of an Adjutant, and in time many other employments of
  Credit. When you are posted to your Company, take care that the
  Sergeants or Corporals constantly bring you the orders; treat
  those officers with kindness, but keep them at a Distance, so will
  you be beloved and respected by them; read your orders with
  attention, and if anything in particular concerns yourself, put it
  down in your Memorandum Book, which I wou'd have you constantly in
  your Pocket ready for any Remarks; be sure to attend constantly
  morning and evening the Roll Calling of the Company, watch
  carefully the Absentees, and enquire into reasons for their being
  so, and particularly be watchfull they do not endeavour to impose
  on you sham Excuses, which they are apt to do with young officers,
  but will be deterr'd from it by a proper severity in detecting
  them;----"

Here, unfortunately, the remainder of the sheet has been torn off, and
the continuation of the excellent precepts it no doubt contained, is
irretrievably lost. Enough has luckily been preserved to show what an
admirably disciplined soldier mind Wolfe possessed, taken in conjunction
with the outline of military reading, pointed out in the letter
contributed by Mr. Cole, already alluded to, and written with the same
kindly object (the instruction of youthful officers), probably only a
few months prior to the date of the mutilated one.

As it may be thought desirable to say something more than I have done,
regarding the packet of Wolfe's letters in my custody, I beg to state
that the officer to whom they are all addressed, was William Rickson, a
native of Pembroke. He was eight years older than Wolfe. They appear to
have served together in Flanders. Both were at the battle of Dettigen,
and their names appear in the list of promotions consequent on that
victory. Rickson and young Wolfe were also in the same regiment,
commanded by Wolfe's father, in Flanders. I think it was then known as
"Onslows." Both father and son appear to have felt a strong attachment
to Rickson: this appears from the letters. On the part of James Wolfe in
particular, this attachment was of the most ardent description. In one
letter, dated Banff (Scotland), 9th June, 1751, he thus writes to
Rickson:

  "I believe that no man can have a sincerer regard for you than
  myself, nor can any man wish to serve and assist you with more
  ardour;" and "Attachments between men of certain characters do
  generally arise from something alike in their natures, and should
  never fall from a certain degree of firmness, that makes them the
  same all the world over, and incapable of any diminution. I have
  (as you justly acknowledge) a perseverance in friendship, that
  time, nor distance, nor circumstance, can defeat,--nay, even
  neglect can hardly conquer it; and you are just as warm and as
  near me in North America as you would be upon the spot."

Rickson survived Wolfe eleven years, and I possess the key of the tomb
in which his remains repose in Restalrig churchyard, near Edinburgh. A
fine miniature of him in his antique regimentals also exists; and it is
interesting to contemplate the lineaments of a countenance so familiar
to Wolfe, and of a man to whom the latter seems to have communicated his
inmost thoughts. There are passages in the letters indicative of this to
a degree, that I felt bound in honour not to disclose. Rickson died a
lieutenant-colonel in 1770. His antique military chest remained in
possession of relatives in Scotland almost forgotten, till about three
years ago curiosity prompted the examination of a mass of old papers,
covered with dust, lying at the bottom of it. A number of curious
documents have thus been brought to light, including a file of letters
to Rickson from the Duke of Queensbury (under whose auspices he
constructed the military roads in Gallowayshire) and other distinguished
personages of the last century, but best of all twelve invaluable
letters from the lamented Wolfe, tied up by themselves, probably by
Rickson, as memorials of his bosom friend who fell in the arms of
victory. It was, as already said, among these old papers that the
fragment of the letter above quoted was also found lately, on a more
careful inspection of the antique chest in which they lay. I was so much
struck with the noble sentiments expressed by Wolfe in the letters, that
I ventured to write a short sketch of him from very imperfect materials,
which appeared, along with the letters themselves, _ad longam_, in
Tait's _Edinburgh Magazine_ for December, 1849. Had I been aware of some
of the facts which have since been contributed to the "N. & Q.," I would
have modified certain passages in the narrative. All I aimed at,
however, was merely to elucidate the letters which accident placed in my
custody. But I now earnestly invite some competent writer to rescue
Wolfe's history from the undeserved neglect and obscurity in which it is
at present shrouded. I shall cheerfully allow any such party access to
the whole letters, under proper guards for their safety, and my address
has been left with the Editor accordingly.

    Ȝ.

  Glasgow.


EARL OF CHEPSTOW.

(Vol. v., pp. 126. 204. 261.)

The seeming difficulty regarded in these communications arises from
Hooker's unauthorised translation of "Comes Strigulensis" into "Earl of
Chepsto_ne_," and in a phrase of ancient parlance appearing a Title of
Dignity. The error does not exist in the original work, as Giraldus
wrote "Dermutius Morchardi filius, Lagenensium Princeps, _Ricardo Comiti
Strigulensi, Gilleberti Comitis filio_, S."--Camden's _Anglica_, &c., p.
767.

The town, called in later times _Chepstow_ by the English, and sometimes
_Cas Gwent_, or _Castell Gwent_, by the Welsh, is clearly _Strigul_ (as
shown in Lhwyd's _Commentariolum_, p. 102. edit. 1731, and
_Archæologia_, vol. xxix. p. 31.); but these names are not precisely
equivalent. In early documents the Town, Vill, or Burgh is thus
variously named, and the style of the present Court Baron is, "the
Honour of Chepstow, _alias_ Striguil;" but in old charters and
chronicles the Lordship Marcher, the castle, and the honorary
description of its lords, are usually designated by the word "Strigul"
(variously written) only; and of this "Hooker _alias_ Vowell" was
perhaps ignorant. Giraldus himself is correct, as shown above.

As to the style of "Earl of Strigul," Dugdale admits the use of it by
Richard Fitz-Gilbert, who occurs as "Comes Strigulensis" above, and as
"Ricardus Comes de Striguil Dermuciigener," in Ralph de Diceto (p.
590.). His descendant Gilbert Marescall is also termed "Counte de
Strogoile" in the petition of Margaret, daughter of Thomas de
Brotherton, at the coronation of Richard II. (Vincent's _Corrections_,
p. 345.) There is a stronger instance in Selden's _Titles of Honour_ (p.
617. edit. 1631), correctly cited from Hoveden, and mentioning the fact
of William Marshall and Geoffrey Fitz-Peter being severally girded
"_gladio Comitatus de Striguil_ et gladio Comitatus de Essex," at the
coronation of King John, with remarks on their previous rank as earls,
their administration of earldoms, but their non-investiture, and their
sitting at the royal table in consequence of this investiture.

Nevertheless, it is laid down in the third _Report on the Dignity of a
Peer_, p. 146., that such expressions are to be considered vague. It
refers, for instance, any description of Roger de Montegomeri, as Earl
of Arundel (if such exists), to _residence_; adding, "that is, he was an
earl, and from his _residence_ was denominated Earl of Arundel, _as the
Earls of Pembroke were denominated Earls of Strigul_, a castle which
appears to have been built by William Fitz-Osborn, Earl of Hereford, and
which had _no connexion_ with the county of Pembroke."

As to the immediate parentage of Earl Richard Fitz-Gilbert, proof will
be readily found in the Foundation Charters of St. Neot's Priory and
Tintern Abbey, in Gorham's _St. Neot's_, p. cv.; _Monasticon_, vol. v.
p. 267.

    GEO. O.

  S. P. near Chepstow.


DEATHS FROM FASTING.

(Vol. v., p. 247.)

In the parish church of Tenby there is an emaciated figure, lightly
wrapped in a winding-sheet, which is supposed to represent Tully, Bishop
of St. David's, of whose death a tradition, similar to that related by
BURIENSIS, is current. I should mention that there is also in the same
church another monument of a bishop (as is shown by the still
distinguishable mitre and crozier), which is also stated to be his. I
have been informed that where a monument was surmounted by a
representation of an emaciated corpse (emblematic of the poverty of
spirit in which the original was supposed to live and die), it was usual
to erect a second effigy, representing the departed as he actually
appeared to his fellow men. This last sentence I must however put in the
form of a Query, in the hope that some of your correspondents may answer
it with special reference to the supposed tomb, or tombs, of Bishop
Tully?

    SELEUCUS.

There are two monuments of the description respecting which BURIENSIS
desires information in the county of Devon. One against the south wall
of the chancel of Feniton Church, is an elegant altar tomb ornamented
with quatrefoils, on which lies the effigy in a shroud, tied at the head
and feet. This may be assigned to the thirteenth century, but nothing
appears to indicate whether it is the monument of a priest or of one of
the Malherbe family, who were the lords of the soil. The other similar
monument is in the north aisle of the choir of Exeter Cathedral, and is
of later date. The skeleton figure lies on a slab in a recess under an
obtuse arch, all highly decorated with tracery, panels, and foliage.
This is said to be to the memory of Canon Parkhouse, buried in 1540. See
_Gough. Sepulch. Mon._ Introd. p. 111.; and Britton's _Exeter
Cathedral_, p. 139., and plate xxii.

    J. D. S.

In the north aisle of Exeter Cathedral there is an instance similar to
that mentioned by your correspondent, BURIENSIS, of a monument with the
figure of a human skeleton lying at full length on a winding sheet. The
following inscription is over the arch:

      "Ista figura docet: nos omnes premeditari
      Qualiter ipsa nocet: mors quando venit dominari."

Tradition ascribes it to Bishop Lacy's tomb, and the vergers even at the
present day inform visitors that it was erected to commemorate his
attempt to fast during Lent. It is an exquisite piece of work. An
engraving of it may be found in Britton's _Exeter Cathedral_. I have
heard that there is a similar monument in Salisbury Cathedral, and it
appears probable, from there being more than one, that it was a
favourite device to represent the instability of human grandeur.

    EXONIENSIS.

There is a tradition similar to that related by BURIENSIS, and alike
unfounded, concerning Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln, who is buried on the
north side of the choir of Lincoln cathedral in a chapel of his own
foundation. On the floor is an image of a decayed skeleton-like body; on
the tomb above, his effigy arrayed in his episcopal robes.

    K. P. D. E.

I would remind your correspondent BURIENSIS of the splendid monument in
Winchester cathedral, beneath which are deposited the remains of Richard
Fox, Bishop of Winchester, and founder of Corpus Christi College,
Oxford, who died here on the 14th of September, 1528. In an oblong
niche, under the third arch, lies the figure of Bishop Fox, represented
as an emaciated corpse in a winding-sheet, with his feet resting on a
skull. It is a tradition of the vergers that he died whilst endeavouring
to imitate the example of Our Lord by a fast of forty days.

The figure of Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, is also
represented, like that of Fox, as a skeleton; and the same tale of a
forty days' fast traditionally delivered by the same authorities.

    E. S. S. W.

  Winton.


BURNING FERN BRINGS RAIN.

(Vol. v., p. 242.)

Your correspondent μ asks whether any traces of such a popular
belief exist at present.

In the Highlands of Scotland, where at this season the heather is burned
by the shepherds, the belief is general among the people; I may add that
it is a belief founded on observation. In Australia a hot wind blowing
from the north caused (in part at least) by bush fires in the interior,
is invariably succeeded by rain from the opposite part.

It would not be difficult, perhaps, to assign a satisfactory reason for
a meteorological fact, which by a misnomer is dubbed "Folk Lore."

    W. C.

It is believed in the neighbourhood of Melrose that burning the heather
brings rain.

It must be remarked that Tweeddale runs mainly west and east; that the
heather-covered hills are all to the _west_ of this place. West wind
brings rain.

    †

In the north of England, and in Scotland, and probably in all moorland
districts of the country, it is the practice of shepherds in spring,
when the heather is dry enough, to set fire to it and burn large tracts
of it, in order to get rid of the old woody plants. The young heather
which springs up from the roots produces much better and more palatable
food for the sheep. In this process, which takes place at the same time
in a whole district (viz. when there has been no rain for some time),
the whole air becomes loaded with smoke, and a very misty state of the
atmosphere is produced. It is the general belief throughout the south of
Scotland and in the Cheviot range, that this burning "doth draw downe
rain."

Luckily this season, though there has been much moor burning, the
general expectation has been agreeably disappointed, and the weather has
now continued perfectly dry for several weeks, and appears likely to do
so for some time to come, to the great delight of the farmers, as most
propitious for sowing their grain of all kinds.

    J. SS.

  Lammermuir.


THE FISH CALLED "VENDACE."

(Vol. iii., p. 301.)

A short time since, an eminent naturalist directed my attention to
Yarrell's _History of British Fishes_ (2 vols. 8vo. 1836, and
_Supplement_, 1839), with reference to this curious fish.

Mr. Yarrell does not attempt to identify the vendace with any foreign
species, nor to answer the question, who introduced them in Lochmaben?
However, his account of the other species of the genus _Coregonus_ in
Great Britain is well worth giving.

The species of the genus _Coregonus_ are numerous in Europe, and several
of them are so similar to each other that they are often confounded.

  "Some writers have even considered the Vendisse of Lochmaben as
  the same with the _Powan_ of [Loch Lomond] Perthshire, the
  _Schelly_ of Cumberland, the _Gwyniad_ of Wales, and the _Pollan_
  of Ireland. This is not the case, for the Pollan of Ireland is
  distinct from the two species of _Coregonus_ found in Great
  Britain."

  "The _Gwyniad_ is very numerous in Ulswater and other large lakes
  of Cumberland, where on account of its large scales it is called
  the _Schelly_. The fish is not unlike a herring in appearance; the
  Welsh term _Gwyniad_ has reference to their silvery white colour."

Izaak Walton notices it at the end of chap. xiii.:

  "Nor would I have you ignorant of a rare fish called a _Guiniad_,"
  &c.

The _Pollan_ is principally found in Loch Neagh, also in Loch Derg and
Loch Erne. Mr. Thompson, of Belfast, says:

  "The habits of this fish do not, with the exception of having been
  in some instances taken with the artificial fly, differ in any
  marked respect from those of the Vendace of Scotland, or the
  Gwyniad of Wales, and are in accordance with such species of
  Continental Europe as are confined to inland waters, and of whose
  history we have been so fully informed by Bloch."

In 1835, Mr. Thompson published some observations on this species. The
earliest notice of it that he has seen, occurs, he says, in Harris's
_History of County Down_, 1744.

  "The Vendace or Vendis (_Coregonus Willughbii_); Vendace,
  _Jardine_; Vangis and Juvangis, Penn, _Brit. Zool._, vol. iii. p.
  420.; Vendace, Knox, _Trans. R.S.E._, vol. xii. p. 503.

  "But little is known of this delicate fish," says Mr. Yarrell,
  "beyond what has been published by Sir William Jardine, Bart., in
  the 3rd volume of the _Edinb. Journal of Nat. and Geog. Science_,
  and by Dr. Knox. The Vendace is only known in the lochs in the
  neighbourhood of Lochmaben, in Dumfriesshire. Sir W. Jardine says,
  'The story that it was introduced into these lochs by the
  unfortunate Mary, Queen of Scots, is mentioned by Pennant in his
  description of the Gwyniad, (and it is likely that his information
  was derived from this vicinity,) and is still in circulation. That
  the fish was introduced from some continental lake, I have little
  doubt, but would rather attribute the circumstance to some of the
  religious establishments which at one time prevailed in the
  neighbourhood, and which were well known to pay considerable
  attention both to the table and cellar. The introduction must have
  taken place by means of spawn: the fish themselves could not be
  transported alive even a few miles. They are not confined to the
  castle loch, but are found in several others, some of which have
  no communication with that where they are thought peculiar. In
  general habits, the Vendace nearly resemble the Gwyniad, and
  indeed most of the allied species of the genus."

Mr. Yarrell gives representations of two magnified specimens of their
food.

    JARLTZBERG.


MACARONIC POETRY.

(Vol. v., p. 166.)

Perhaps some of the correspondents of "N. & Q." who take an interest in
this style of composition are not acquainted with the two following
productions, which appeared at Oxford several years ago, the author of
the first being an accomplished first-class man, and, I think, a member
of Worcester College:

1. "Viæ per Angliam ferro stratæ." (The Railroads);

2. "Poema Canino-Anglico-Latinum, super adventu recenti serenissimarum
Principum." (The Duchess of Kent and the Princess Victoria.)

The perusal of MR. CORNISH'S curious communication (Vol. v., p. 251.)
also reminds me of the subjoined clever and amusing verses which were
written by a talented friend and schoolfellow, whose premature decease
occurred about two years ago, and which appear to be well worthy of
publication. It will be seen that the words, which are all Latin, are
quite unconnected and unmeaning, but when separated or united they
become converted into our own language, or rather into a mixture of
English and Irish. I have thought it absolutely necessary to annex a
key.

      MI MOLLE ANNI.

      _An Irish Ballad._

      O pateo tulis aras cale fel O,
      Hebetis vivis id, an sed "Aio puer vello!"
      Vittis nox certias in erebo de nota olim,--
      A mite grate sinimus tonitis ovem:
      "Præ sacer, do tellus, hausit," sese,
      "Mi Molle anni cano te ver ægre?"
      Ure Molle anu cano te ver ægre.
      Vere truso aio puellis tento me;
      Thrasonis plano "cum Hymen" (heu sedit),
      "Diutius toga thyrso" Hymen edidit;--
      Sentior mari aget O mare nautis alter id alas!
      Alludo isto terete ure daris pausas anas.
      "O pater hic, heu vix en" ses Molle, and vi?
      Heu itera vere grates troche in heri.
      Ah Moliere arti fere procaciter intuitis!
      Vos me! for de parte da vas ure arbuteis.
      Thus thrasonis planas vel huma se,
      Vi ure Molle anu cano te ver ægre.
      Betæ Molle indulgent an suetas agile,--
      Pares pector sex, uno vimen ars ille;
      "Quietat ure servis Jam," sato heras heu pater,
      "Audio do missus Molle, an vatis thema ter?
      Ara mi honestatis, vetabit, diu se,--
      O mare, mi dare, cum specto me:
      Ago in a væ æstuare, vel uno more illic,
      O mare, mi dare, cum pacto ure pater hic."
      Beavi ad visu civile, an socia luse,
      Ure Molle an huma fore ver ægre.

      _Key._

      MY MOLLY AND I.

      O Paty O'Toole is a rascally fellow,
      He beat his wife's head, and said, "I hope you are well, O!"
      With his knocks, Sir, she has in her body not a whole limb,--
      A mighty great sin I must own it is of him.
      "Pray say, Sir, do tell us, how is it," says he,
      "My Molly and I cannot ever agree?"
      Your Molly and you cannot ever agree:
      Very true, so I hope you will listen to me;
      The _rason_ is plain, "O come, Hymen" (you said it),
      Do ye tie us togather. So Hymen he did it.
      Since your marriage to Mary now 'tis alter'd, alas!
      All you do is to _trate_ your dear spouse as an ass.
      "O Patrick! you vixen," says Molly, and why?
      You hit her a very great stroke in her eye.
      Ah Molly! her heart I fear _proke_ as 'twere in two it is!
      Woes me! for departed away sure her beauty is.
      Thus the _rason_ is plain, as well you may see,
      Why your Molly and you cannot ever agree.
      Be to Molly indulgent and _swate_ as a jelly,--
      Pay respect to her sex, you know women are silly:
      "Quite at your service, I am," say to her as you pat her,
      "How d'ye do, Misses Molly, and what is the matter?
      Arah, my honey! stay, 'tis, wait a bit, d'ye see;--
      O Mary, my _dary_, come _spake_ to me:
      A-going away is't you are, well you no more I'll lick,
      O Mary, my _dary_, come _pack_ to your Patrick."
      Behave, I advise you, and so shall you see,
      Your Molly and you may for ever agree.

    E. N.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Cooper's Miniatures of Cromwell_ (Vol. iv., p. 368.; Vol. v., pp. 17.
92. 189. 234. 255.).--Eight years ago I saw, at the house of my friend,
A. Macdonald, Esq., since deceased, but then living in Hyde Park Square,
three miniatures, which were said to be by Cooper, of Cromwell and his
two daughters. The miniatures of the women were, I thought, stiff and
harsh; but that of their father (of which only the head was finished)
appeared to me to be the finest painting of the kind that I ever saw. I
examined it through a strong magnifying glass, when the face exhibited
all the truth and force of a portrait. A high value was set upon it; but
I do not know whether it was sold, or where it is.

    ALFRED GATTY.

  [We take this opportunity of stating that we have availed ourself
  of General Fox's invitation, and examined the beautiful miniature
  of Cromwell, described by him in our Number for the 6th instant,
  and so considerately left by him at Colnaghi's, for the inspection
  of all who are interested in the subject. The General having
  placed beside it the volume of Carlyle's _Cromwell_, containing
  the engraving from Cooper's miniature in the possession of
  Archdeacon Berners, we are bound to agree with him that the
  Archdeacon's may be "better painted;" but General Fox may
  certainly congratulate himself upon being the possessor of a work
  of very high art, as well as of great historical interest; and one
  which we are extremely pleased to have had the opportunity of
  examining. It will, we believe, remain on view until the 31st.]

_The Vellum-bound Junius_ (Vol. iii., p. 262.).--Your correspondent MR.
HAGGARD tells us, that from the time he read the private correspondence
between Junius and Woodfall he has examined all book catalogues that
came in his way, in the hope of finding a copy, or the copy, "bound in
vellum"--so bound by Woodfall, for and at the express desire of Junius.
Of course the edition so bound was "the author's edition," as Junius
calls it, the edition of 1772, printed by H. J. Woodfall. At last, says
MR. HAGGARD, "_the long-wished-for object appeared at the Stowe sale_;"
but though, he bid eight pounds, he was not so fortunate as to obtain
it. Thus far all is simple and clear enough. But then MR. HAGGARD
subsequently informs us (Vol. iii., p. 307.) that the reason of his
"being so desirous to procure this copy" was, because it was "not only
bound in vellum, but was printed on that article"--that is, as I
understand it, because it was _not_ the copy bound by Woodfall for
Junius. I am at a loss to reconcile these statements. However, as I
observe by the periodicals that MR. HAGGARD'S first statement is getting
into circulation, and that it now assumes this form--that the
vellum-bound copy of Junius presented by Woodfall to Junius was sold at
the Stowe sale, I think it right to state, that the Stowe copy, printed
on and bound in vellum, was, as I am informed on good authority, not the
edition of 1772--not a Woodfall edition at all--but the common
illustrated edition, printed more than thirty years after, by Bensley,
for Vernor and Hood.

    V. B. J.

_Sept_ (Vol. v., p. 277.).--Dr. Ogilvie's derivation is absurdly
far-fetched. _Sept_ is notoriously from the Latin _septus_ or _septum_,
_inclosed_, _an inclosure_, and it is applied to one kindred or family
living in or round the inclosure in which they herded their cattle. See
Spenser's _Ireland_; see also Cole's _Dictionary_:

  "SEPT, an inclosure; the multitude of the same name in Ireland."

In ancient Rome certain classes of voters were called _Septs_, from the
_septa_ or _inclosures_ in which they were arranged.

    C.

_Many Children_ (Vol. v., p. 204.).--I am indebted to the Rev. J.
Sanford, orderly preacher at the Rolls chapel, for the subjoined curious
statement, which you may add, if you please, to the instances of female
fecundity already recorded in your pages.

The Marchese Frescobaldi, the representative of one of the most ancient
Florentine families, is still possessed of a portrait of his ancestress,
Dionora Salviati, wife of Bartolomeo Frescobaldi of the same house. She
gave birth to fifty-two children, never less than three at a time; and
there is a tradition in the family that she once had six, and that
twelve were reared. The portrait was painted by the celebrated Bronzino,
who died in 1570, and has recorded the remarkable circumstance in the
following inscription placed under the picture, and in some degree has
thus made himself responsible for the authenticity of the story:--

  "Dionora Salviati moglie di Bartolomeo dei Frascobaldi, fece 52
  figli, e mai meno di tre per parto, come riferesce Gio. Schenzio
  nei libri delle osservazioni amirabili, cioe nel libro quarto de
  Parto a carta 144."

    BRAYBROOKE.

Relative to extraordinary births, I may mention that within half a dozen
miles of this city, and not more than six weeks since, a poor woman gave
birth to four children, two of each sex, and all, with the mother, doing
well. Some millions are born without such, as I may term it, a
phenomenon.

In a very late Brussells paper I find it stated, that in nine years the
wife of a tradesman had twenty-four children, three on each
delivery,--"chose désespérante (it is added) pour le mari, qui désirait
transmettre son nom, car c'étaient toutes des filles." Mercier, in his
_Tableau de Paris_ (1786) quotes _L'Histoire de l'Académie des Sciences_
of the preceding century for a similar fact, where it is asserted that a
baker's wife had twenty-one children in seven years, three at each
birth, and that he had again three children at a birth by a servant
maid.

    J. R. (Cork)

_Hog's Norton_ (Vol. v., p. 245.).--Your correspondent who writes from
Ashby-de-la-Zouch will, it is probable, be surprised to find that _Hog's
Norton_ is almost in his own immediate neighbourhood. In Curtis'
_Topographical History of Leicestershire_ (printed, by-the-bye, at
Ashby), he subjoins to the modern names of places the ancient names as
found in _Domesday Book_, Inquisitiones post mortem, &c. It appears that
_Norton juxta Twycross_ was in other days "Nortone, Hoggenortone, Hog's
Norton." There is, then, no doubt as to which of the many Nortons in
England is Hog's Norton: but whether there is now, or ever was, an organ
in the church; or whether a Mr. Pigge, or any number of _pigs_, played
on one there, I know not.

    S. S. S.

_Cromwell's Skull_ (Vol. v., p. 275.).--Your correspondent J. P., who
inquires in your last respecting the identity of a certain skull with
that of Oliver Cromwell, will find valuable information on the subject
in an article in the fifth volume of the _Dublin Quarterly Journal of
Medical Science_ (1848), entitled--

  "Historical Notes concerning certain Illnesses, the Death, and
  Dis-interment of Oliver Cromwell, by W. White Cooper, F.R.C.S."

This article is very ably written, and throws much light on a vexed
question.

    ANTIQUARIUS.

  Athenæum.

_Eliza Fenning_ (Vol. v., pp. 105. 161.).--It is long after the "N. &
Q." are published that I get sight of a number, or I should have urged
(what may probably have been already done) the very great importance of
obtaining from the workhouse, or wherever else in Suffolk or Essex it
can be obtained, an authentication of the report by Turner, that he was
the poisoner of the family in Chancery Lane, for which crime Eliza
Fenning was executed. One would hope that a question of so much and such
serious monument would not be permitted to remain undetermined, if by
any possibility it can be cleared up.

I well knew the medical man who attended the case, and gave evidence at
the trial,--he was cruelly assailed afterwards by some who had taken a
prejudice against him, and no doubt suffered in his practice in
consequence.

    T. D. P.

_Hexameter on English Counties_ (Vol. v., p. 227.).--The lines referred
to by M. are to be found in Grey's _Memoria Technica_ and Lowe's
_Memories_, p. 172., and runs thus:

      "Nor cum-dúr: we La-yórk: che-de-not-line: shrop sta-le-rut norf:
      Hér-wo-wa-nórtha: Bed-hunt-cámb-suff: mon-gl-óxfo-buck-hart-ess:
      Som-wilt-bérk-Middlesex: corn-dev-dors-hámp-Surrey-Kent Suss."

      "Such as are contiguous southward are joined, as in we la:
      Such as are contiguous westward are hyphened, as che-de."

    C. S. P.

_Fairest Attendant of the Scottish Queen_ (Vol. v., p. 152.).--Your
correspondent who inquires about an attendant of the Scottish queen who
disappeared when she was in England, will find a notice of the same
person in the appendix to Tytler's _History of Scotland_, reign of Queen
Mary. There is a letter there from the English ambassador at Paris to
his Court, with an account of the Queen Dowager's visit to France: he
mentions that King Henry had been captivated by one of the ladies in
Mary's train, who, it was reported, was with child to him. The frail
fair one left with her mistress, but returned shortly thereafter. I
think she must be the person referred to in the _Grey Friars'
Chronicle_.

    J. F.

  Belfast.

_Ecclesiastical Geography_ (Vol. iv., p. 276.).--AJAX, who asks the name
of some work on this subject, may perhaps find his wants supplied in
_Geographia Ecclesiastica, &c._, "Auberto Miraeo auctore."

    D. ROCK.

_Llandudno, on the Great Orme's Head_ (Vol. v., pp. 175. 235.).--MR. WM.
DURRANT COOPER, in "N. & Q.," has quite mistaken the subject of my
inquiry. I am well aware of the cavern, or old copper mine, supposed to
have been worked by the Romans; but the place I inquire about is of a
different description, in every respect, and is only six feet across,
and eight or ten feet high, and fitted up as a place of worship, with a
font, altar, seats, &c. I hope some one who has seen it will be able yet
to throw some light on the subject.

    L. G. T.

  Lichfield.

"_Wise above that which is written_" (Vol. v., pp. 228.
260.).--Professor Scholefield, in his valuable _Hints for an improved
Translation of the New Testament_ (p. 64. 3rd edit.), renders the words
τὸ μὴ ὑπὲρ ὃ γέγραπται φρονεῖν (1 Cor. iv. 6.), "not to be
wise above that which is written," and supports this rendering by clear
and (to my mind) satisfactory argument.

    C. P. PH***.

_Nightingale and Thorn_ (Vol. iv., pp. 175. 242.; Vol. v., p. 39.).--The
origin of this fancy has not yet been reached. The earliest mention of
it that I have met with is by Gascoigne:

      "And thus I sing with pricke against my brest,
      Like Philomene...."--_Steele Glas_, v. 145.

Again, in _The Spanish Tragedy_:

      ... "Haply the gentle nightingale
      Shall carol us asleep ere we be ware,
      And, singing with the prickle at her breast,
      Tell our delight."

And in _The Two Noble Kinsmen_:

      "O for a pricke now like a nightingale,
      To put my breast against."--_Act III. Sc. 4._

    C. P. PH***.

_Friday at Sea_ (Vol. v., p. 200.).--H. M. S. "Wellesley," bearing the
flag of the Earl of Dundonald, on leaving Plymouth for the West Indies,
got under way on _Friday_ the 24th of March, 1848; and, after she had
got outside the breakwater, she was recalled by the Port-admiral, and
did not leave again until the next day: it was to take in the mail-bags,
but the firm belief of the men was, that the gallant admiral purposely
left something behind to avoid going to sea on such an unlucky day as
Friday.

    W. B. M.

  Dee Side.

I heard it stated the other day, in conversation, that the ill-fated
Amazon commenced her voyage on a Friday. Can any of your readers say
with certainty if this was the fact?

    W. FRASER.

_Latin Names of Towns_ (Vol. v., p. 235.).--I transcribe, for the
benefit of your readers, the full title of the largest Geographical
Dictionary which I know to contain the information M. asks for. Dr.
William Smith's _New Dictionary of Classical Geography_ may be expected
to supply the desideratum, in regard to places known to the Greeks and
Romans, but will not, I presume, take up all the names in Baudrand's
_Dictionary_. Its title-page reads as follows:

  "Novum Lexicon Geographicum, in quo universi orbis oppida, urbes,
  regiones, provinciæ, regna, emporia, academiæ, metropoles, flumina
  et maria, _antiquis et recentibus nominibus appellata_, suisque
  distantiis descripta, recensentur. Illud primum in lucem edidit
  Philippus Ferrarius Alexandrinus, totius servorum coetus supremus
  Præsul, S. T. D. atque in Ticinensi Academia publicus Metaphysices
  et Mathematices Professor.

  "Nunc Vero Michael Antonius Baudrand, Parisinus, prior
  commendatarius de roboribus, de novo mercato, et de Gessenis,
  hanc ultimam editionem, ita emendavit, illustravit, dimidiàque
  parte auctiorem fecit, ut Novum Lexicon jure optimo dicatur.

  "Accesserunt sub finem Dominici Magri, Melitensis, Theologi,
  Cathedr. Viterb., &c., appendices et correctiones: atque in has M.
  A. Baudrand notæ."

The work is very useful, but of course no longer new. It is in two thin
folios, and was printed at Eisenach in MDCLXXVII., by John Peter
Schmidt.

    O. T. D.

_Gospel Trees_ (Vol. ii., p. 407.; Vol. v., p. 157.).--BURIENSIS, in a
recent Number, says that he has somewhere read of a tree called the
"Gospel Elm." May, in his _Guide to Stratford-upon-Avon_, published
about twenty years since, gives the following description of an elm,
which is probably the one referred to by your correspondent. After
describing the hamlet of Bishopton, he writes:

  "In varying our return to Stratford, pursuing thus the path along
  the Henley road, we pass at the town's entrance the now decaying
  'Gospel Tree,' that still indicates the boundary of the borough in
  this direction, towards the 'Dove house close.' In a perambulation
  of the boundaries, made here on the 7th of April, 1591[3], this
  elm--judging from its now decayed and weather-beaten aspect--is
  the one there noted as seated on the boundary in this direction,
  whence the line is therein stated as continuing, to 'the two elms
  in Evesham highway.' Such a perambulation was anciently made
  yearly, during Rogation week, by the clergy, magistrates, and
  burgesses; not omitting, for evidence' sake, the boys of the
  grammar school, who then doubtless received, as still is
  customary, some _sensitive_ reminiscences of local
  limitation."--May's _Guide to Stratford-upon-Avon_, p. 92.

  [Footnote 3: "Presentment" in the possession of R. Wheler, Esq.]

The author gives a very plausible reason for the tree's peculiar name,
in the ensuing remark:

  "When the bound mark was a tree, as in the present instance, a
  passage of Scripture was read beneath its branches, a collect was
  recited, and a psalm was sung. Hence its sacred designation, long
  retained, but now well nigh forgotten."--_Ibid._ p. 93.

    SOUTHAMIENSIS.

_Gospel Oaks_ (Vol. v., p. 209.).--Near the hamlet of Cressage, co.
Salop, is a very old oak tree, under which tradition says the first
missionaries of the Gospel to this land preached. The name of the
hamlet, _Cressage_, is, I have been told, a contraction of _Christ's
Oak_.

There is also, near Dudley, a place called _Round Oak_; and on the road
between Walsall and Lichfield, near the latter, may still be seen the
old _Shire Oak_.

At _Stanford's Bridge_, co. Worcester, is a place called the _Apostles'
Oak_; and in the parish of _Hartlebury_, in the same county, is a tree
bearing the name of the _Mitre Oak_. Both these places, and also a
_Rock_, have contended for the honour of being the scene of the
conference of St. Augustine and the British bishops, A.D. 603. (Nash,
vol. ii. p. 399.)

    J. N. B.

  West Bromwich.

"_He that runs may read_" (Vol. v., p. 260.).--In Cowper's _Tirocinium_,
v. 80., are these lines:

      "But truth, on which depends our main concern,
      That 'tis our shame and misery not to learn,
      Shines by the side of every path we tread
      With such a lustre, _he that runs may read_."

    LOUISA JULIA NORMAN.

_Wild Oats_ (Vol. v., p. 227.).--I think I can give a clue to the Query
of BEAU NASH respecting the origin of this phrase. In Kent, if a person
has been talking at random, it is not uncommon to hear it said, "you are
talking _havers_," or _folly_. Now I find in an old dictionary that the
word _havers_ means _oats_; and therefore I conclude, that the phrase
"to sow your wild oats" means nothing more than "to sow folly."

    RUBY.

_Portrait of Mrs. Percy_ (Vol. v., p. 227.).--The picture of Mrs. Percy
holding in her hand the scroll, mentioned by W. S. G., _is_ still in the
house of Ecton. I have made the inquiry from the present Mr. Isted of
Ecton's sister-in-law, who lives within three miles of the place.

      L. M. M. R.

_Traditions of a Remote Period--The Chamberlaine Family_ (Vol. v., p.
77.).--As an instance of the "few links" required to connect the present
time with a remote period, I may mention that a grand-aunt of mine who
lived far into the year 1843, remembered perfectly her "uncle
Chamberlaine,"[4] who was an officer in King James II.'s army, and who
fought at Aughrim and at Limerick, thus connecting in her own person the
days of the "Monster Meetings" with those of the Revolution of 1688. She
remembered many of the old soldier's anecdotes of the stirring times in
which he lived, and I now regret having been so careless as not to have
taken any Note of them. He was, I believe, the last of his race. I hold
his commission, signed by the celebrated Tyrconnell, and also many old
deeds, some of which are prior to the reign of Richard II., and of which
he was said to be very careful, though on examination they have proved
to be of no value, except as antiques.

  [Footnote 4: Her grand-uncle.]

As a descendant I should be much gratified if some of your
correspondents could give me any information as to the family of
Chamberlaine, when they came into Ireland, and who is now the chief
representative of that name?

    T. O'G.

  Dublin.

_St. Bartholomew_ (Vol. v., p. 129.).--The parish church of Wednesbury,
co. Staffordshire, is dedicated to that saint; where, in the east
window, is a full-length figure: it is however of modern date.

    J. N. B.

  West Bromwich.

_John Rogers, Protomartyr; Descendants inquired for_ (Vol. v., p.
247.).--The pedigree in my private collection ends thus:

  "[5]Rev. John Rogers of Beminster, Dorsetshire, from 1796 to 1810,
  when he removed to Tisbury, Wiltshire, where he died in 1815, aged
  57, leaving two daughters, viz.

                          |
            ------------------------------
        2   |                            |    1
      Sarah = George       d'r.            wife of
      widow   Brough.                      George
      d'd                                  Long of
      7 July,                              Clapham
      1846,                                Park
      æt. 39.                              Academy,
                                           1846."

  [Footnote 5: Seventh in direct lineal male descent from the
  protomartyr.]

    E. D.

_English Translation of the Canons_ (Vol. v., p. 246.).--The Queries of
M. on this subject have arisen out of an error, which I fancy must be
his own. After quoting the clause of the 36th Canon, _quodque eodem
taliter uti liceat_, he says:

  "The English translation, to which subscription is now made, has
  the following rendering of the second clause: 'And that the same
  may be lawfully used.' The word 'taliter' seems to be not rendered
  at all."

Of course I cannot tell on what authority he says this; but he is
certainly wrong: for in the Oxford edition (1844) of the _Homilies and
Canons_ this clause stands thus: "and that it may lawfully _so_ be
used." And so it is printed in Hodgson's _Instructions_, p. 8., and in
the Instructions to be observed by Candidates for Holy Orders in the
Diocese of London: and I myself not long ago subscribed to it in this
form. There is then no difference here at all; the Latin being rendered
by the English, not only fully, but literally. I will only add, that the
grammatical meaning of _taliter_, or _so_, appears to me in this place
to be plain enough, without requiring a "theological controversy" to
determine it.

    F. A.

_"Arborei foetus alibi," &c._ (Vol. v., pp. 58. 189.).--I am afraid
I did not make myself intelligible in my former communication. Certainly
W. A. C. does not understand me. The question is, are we justified in
translating _alibi atque_ "otherwhere than," in like manner as we
translate _aliter atque_ "otherwise than?" W. A. C. takes for granted
that the line in question refers to only one district. But that is the
very point in doubt. The "head master's" translation makes it refer to
two.

    W. S.

_Horn-blowing_ (Vol. v., p. 148.).--In reference to this practice, I may
state that a similar custom prevails here (Gainsborough, Lincolnshire),
but on the 29th May, or "Royal Oak Day." For some days previously the
boys collect all the birds' eggs they can find or purchase, and early in
the morning of the 29th, they may be seen returning from the woods in
crowds, with an ample supply of oak. They next procure a large quantity
of flowers, with which they construct a garland in the form of a crown,
the apples of the oak being all gilded, surrounded by flowers and
festoons of birds' eggs. The garland is then suspended across the
street, and every little urchin being provided with a horn, some the
natural horn of the cow, others of tin, similar to those formerly used
by the guard of the mail coaches, they keep up throughout the day a most
terrible blowing of horns; the doleful noise being ill in accordance
with the festivity and rejoicing which the garlands are presumed to
indicate. I have been unable to learn the origin or import of this
singular custom.

    T. DYSON.

  Gainsborough.

"_God's Love_" (Vol. v., p. 272.).--If T. S. will refer to Wood's
_Athenæ Oxon._, vol. iii. col. 698. edit. 4to., he will find all account
of the author of _God's Love_. Wood records an edition of 1659. In the
_Bibliotheca Anglo-Poetica_, No. 594., was one dated 1679; but I have
now before me the _first_, which neither Wood nor his editor appear to
have heard of. The title:

  "God's Love and Man's Vnworthiness: whereunto is annexed a
  Discourse between the Soul and Satan. With several Divine
  Ejaculations. Written by John Quarles. London: Printed for John
  Stafford, and are to be sold at his house in S. Bride's
  Church-yard; and by Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Armes, in
  St. Paul's Church-yard; and John Holder, at the Blue Anchor, in
  the New Exchange. 1651."

Collation: the minde of the frontispiece: 8 lines verse. The
frontispiece, or engraved title: _God's Loue, Man's Vnworthiness_, by
Io. Qu. "Lord, what is man," &c. _Ps._ viii. 4. An engraved portrait of
the author, kneeling and saying, "O giue salvation vnto Israell out of
Sion!" (this unknown to Granger or Bromley: the latter records _three_
other portraits of the author.) Then the title, as given before. The
dedication: "To my much honoured and esteemed Friend, Edward Benlowes,
Esq." To the Reader. To my Muse: "Tel me, presumptuous Muse, how dar'st
thou treat." _God's Love_, &c., pp. 1. to 66. A Dialogue, &c., pp. 67.
to 108. Pp. 109, 110. wanting in my copy, but probably blank, as the
catch-word "Divine" agrees with "Divine Ejaculations," which commence
on p. 111. and end at p. 160., thus concluding the volume.

    P. B.

_Plague Stones_ (Vol. v., p. 226.).--One of these stones is (I believe)
still standing at Bury Saint Edmunds. In a paper read to the Bury and
West Suffolk Arch. Inst. (vide vol. i. p. 42. of the _Society's
Proceedings_) Mr. S. Tymms says:

  "The small-pox has been a frequent visitor of Bury in its most
  terrible forms. In 1677, says Gillingwater (_Hist. Bury_, 226.),
  it was so prevalent that the people resorting to the market by the
  Rislygate Road, were accustomed to dip their money in water
  (tradition says vinegar) which had been placed in _the cavity of
  the ruined base of the boundary cross_ situate at the bottom of
  Chalk Lane, with the view of preventing any infection being
  conveyed to the neighbouring towns and villages."

My attention has been frequently called to a stone of similar
description standing in the parish of Stuston in this county, by the
side of the Ipswich and Norwich turnpike; it is called in Kirby's
_Suffolk Traveller_, 1st ed. pp. 52-3., a "Stuston Stone" and "The White
Stone," and is nearly equidistant from Diss and Eye, between two and
three miles.

    J. B. COLMAN.

_Melody of the Dying Swan_ (Vol. ii., p. 476., footnote; Vol. v., p.
187.).--

  "Sed neque Cygni canunt," says Leland, in his _Cygnea Cantio_,
  "nisi flante zephyro vento geniali quidem illo, si quicquam Æliani
  judicio tribuendum."

In the work itself, which is a poetical panegyric on King Henry VIII.,
the following lines occur:

      "Strepitum dedit sonorum
      Cygnorum niveus chorus canentûm,
      Concussis alacri vigore pennis.
      Applausus placuit mihi canorus."

The last line, however, seems only to apply to the applauding sound of
the wings, and not to intimate that any music was produced by them.

    C. I. R.

_Cimmerii_ (Vol. v., p. 188.).--The belief that the Cymry are descended
from Gomer can prove very little as to the restlessness of those who
hold it; and if it is making progress, the opinion must be supported by
probability: consequently a mere denial will not dispel the illusion.
Authors quite as remarkable for their matter-of-fact opinions as A. N.
may be, have not rejected the connexion of the Cymry with Gomer. For
instance, Volney, in his attacks on Scripture history, when examining
Gen. x. on Gomer, adopts an argument in support of this paternity,
though not in its Biblical sense, viewing Gomer as a chief. As it is not
an unusual circumstance for a nation to adopt the name of its patriarch
or founder (and on this point I would refer to a note to Gibbon's
_Decline_, chap. lxiv.), I trust I shall be excused for believing myself
descended from Gomer, until decided evidence is adduced that I am not.

Pompeius Festus I am unacquainted with; but on consulting Plutarch, in
Mario, the following contradictory statements may be seen: "The Germans
called banditti _Cimbri_;" and, "Hence, therefore, these barbarians who
came into Italy first issued; being anciently called _Cimmerii_, and
afterwards _Cimbri_, and the appellation was _not at all from their
manners_."

That the old Germans may have called robbers _Cimbri_, does not prove
that word implies _robbers_, or anything of the kind; but it indicates
that the intrusion of the old Germans on the lands of the Cimbri caused
the invaded to make reprisals on the invaders; and then the injured
Germans connected or identified the Cimbrian name with that of enemy or
robber.

    GOMER.

_Stoke_ (Vol. v., pp. 106. 161. 213.).--I think that the towns and
parishes of _Tawstock_, _Culmstock_, _Tavistock_, _Plymstock_, _Stockton
on Tees_, _Severn Stoke_, _Stoke in Teignhead_, _Stoke on Tern_, _Stoke
on Trent_, must have received their names from a _stockade_ of some kind
_in_ the rivers near which they are situated. There is at a ford across
the river Severn, about half a mile from Welsh Pool, a weir made of
stakes and brushwood erected a few yards above the ford, for the sole
purpose of diminishing the force of the current, and spreading the water
into a stream of an uniform depth. I conjecture that in ancient times
the fords of our larger rivers were kept in a passable state during the
winter season by weirs of this description, and that there were fords in
the rivers at the places above mentioned. There is near Nuneaton the
chapelry of _Stock in Ford_, but I am not sufficiently acquainted with
that place to be able to conjecture from what circumstance it may have
derived its name. I infer that one meaning of the word _stoke_ is _wood_
of any kind, from the fact that the opening through which coals are
introduced under the larger boilers in our houses is called a
_stoke-hole_, from the wood formerly used for fuel.

    S. S. S. (2).

_King's College Chapel Windows_ (Vol. v., p 276.).--See Blomefield's
_History of Norfolk_, vol. i. p. 406., and vol. ii. p. 388. At the
latter reference, under the head of Richard Nykke or Nix, Bishop of
Norwich, 1500, occurs this passage: "This bishop incurred a premunire
for extending his jurisdiction over the Mayor of Thetford, and was fined
for it. With part of the fine, it is said, the beautiful windows in
King's College Chapel, Cambridge, were purchased." The statement is
given at greater length at the first of the above-quoted references. I
never heard of the story before I met with it in Blomefield.

    T. H. L.

Mr. Blomefield, referring to Richard Nykke, Bishop of Norwich
(1500-1535), says he incurred a premunire for extending his
jurisdiction over the Mayor of Thetford, "and was fined for it, with
part of which fine _'tis said_ the beautiful painted glass windows in
King's College Chapel at Cambridge were purchased."--_Hist. of Norfolk_,
8vo. edit., ii. 52.; iii. 546.

There is good foundation for the statement that this bishop "was
condemned in the premunire" (Coke's _Reports_, xii. 40, 41.); but I
question if there be authentic evidence that he "redeemed the punishment
of that offence by the glasing of the King's College Chappell windows in
Cambridge." Bishop Nykke is no doubt the prelate to whom Ferne alludes.

    C. H. COOPER.

  Cambridge.

_Quotation Wanted_ (Vol. v., p. 228.).--"_Cujus vita despicitur_," &c.,
is from S. Gregor. _Magn. Homil._ xii. in _Evangelia_, § 1.

    J. C. R.

_The Great Bowyer Bible_ (Vol. v., p. 248.).--J. S. is informed that
this illustrated Bible is now in the hands of Messrs. Puttick and
Simpson, and may be seen at their sale-rooms in Piccadilly.

    F. S. Q.

_Showing the White Feather_ (Vol. v., p. 274.).--The white feather is
the sign of the cross-bred bird; you will never see one in my tail.

   GAMECOCK.

_John Lord Berkeley_ (Vol. v., p. 275.) never was Bishop of Ely. John
Lord Berkeley of Stratton, the second son of John Berkeley, was a
British admiral; he died on the 27th of July, 1696-7, not more than
thirty-four years of age, during eight of which he had filled the office
of admiral. See Rose's _Biographical Dictionary_.

    TYRO.

  Dublin.

_History of Commerce_ (Vol. v., p. 276.).--C. I. P. will, I think, find
much of the information required in David Macpherson's _Annals of
Commerce_, London, 1805, 4 vols. 4to. particularly in vols. iii. and
iv.; also in _The History of European Commerce with India_, by the same
author, London 1812, 4to. Neither of them is entered in the Bodleian
Catalogue.

    C. I. R.

_Game of Curling_ (Vol. v., p. 13.).--The third volume of Tytler's
_Lives of Scottish Worthies_ (No. 37. of the _Family Library_) contains
a series of antiquarian illustrations, of which the last is devoted to
"Ancient Scottish Games and Amusements." The author refers particularly
to the MS. accounts of the Lord High Treasurer during the reign of King
James IV. (1488-1513), in which, however, there appears to be no notice
of the "roaring game." The origin of this favourite amusement is
certainly involved in mystery, and I have repeatedly failed in my
endeavours to ascertain the meaning of the name by which the game is
known. On consulting the abridgment of Jamieson's _Dictionary_ for the
derivation, I find the following:--

  "Perhaps from Teut. _krollen_, _krull-en_, sinuare, flectere,
  whence E. _curl_; as the great art of the game is to make the
  stones bend or curve in towards the mark, when it is so blocked up
  that they cannot be directed in a straight line."

    E. N.

_Ancient Trees_ (Vol. iv., pp. 401. &c.).--Notwithstanding the assertion
of Dr. Johnson, many fine specimens of timber have long existed to the
north of the Tweed. At p. 20. of the _Edinburgh Antiquarian Magazine_
(Edin. 1848) will be found a "List of Scottish Trees, of remarkable
magnitude, as they existed in 1812," including numerous examples of the
oak, larch, ash, elm, beech, silver fir, Scots fir, sycamore, chesnut,
black poplar, and yew. One of the largest in the catalogue is the great
yew at Fortingal, in Perthshire, measured by the Hon. Judge Barrington
in 1768, when its circumference was no less than fifty-two feet.

    E. N.

_Paring the Nails, &c._ (Vol. v., pp. 142. &c.).--

  "Now no superfluity of our food, or in general no excrementitious
  substance, is looked upon by them (the Egyptian priests) as pure
  and clean; such, however, are all kinds of wool and down, our hair
  and our nails. It would be the highest absurdity therefore for
  those who, whilst they are in a course of purification, are at so
  much pains to take off the hair from every part of their own
  bodies, at the same time to cloath themselves with that of other
  animals. So when we are told by Hesiod 'not to pare our nails,
  whilst we are present at the festivals of the Gods,' we ought so
  to understand him as if he designed hereby to inculcate that
  purity with which we ought to come prepared, before we enter upon
  any religious duty, that we have not to make ourselves clean,
  whilst we ought to be occupied in attending to the solemnity
  itself."--Plutarch's Treatise of _Isis and Osiris_, translated by
  Squire, p. 5. 1744.

This note will show the great antiquity of these nail-paring and
hair-cutting superstitions. What is there does not come from Egypt?

    A. HOLT WHITE.




Miscellaneous


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

POPE'S WORKS, BY WARTON, 1797. Vol. IV.

ROSCOE'S NOVELIST'S LIBRARY.--TRISTRAM SHANDY. Vol. II.

LINGARD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 4to. edit. Vol. VII.

LEBEUF, TRAITE HISTORIQUE SUR LE CHANT ECCLESIASTIQUE.

NOTES AND QUERIES. No. 19.

EDWIN AND EMMA. Tayler, 1776.

GEMMÆ ET SCULPTURÆ ANTIQUÆ DEPICTÆ IN LATINUM VERSÆ, per Jac. Gronovium.
Amstelodami, 1685.

MASSARII ANNOTATIONES IN NONUM PLINII HISTORIÆ NATURALIS LIBRUM.
Basileæ, 1537.

SWALBACI DISSERTATIO DE CICONIIS, &c. Spiræ, 1630.

SYNTAGMA HERBARUM ENCOMIASTICUM, ABR. ORTELIO INSCRIPTUM. Ex officina
Plantin. 1614.

TYRWHITT, THO. CONJECTURÆ IN STRABONEM. London, 1783.

CRAKANTHORP'S DEFENCE OF JUSTINIAN THE EMPEROR AGAINST CARDINAL
BARONIUS. London, 1616.

HALLERI (A.) ELEMENTA PHYSIOLOGIÆ CORPORIS HUMANI. 8 Vols. 4to. Lausannæ
and Lugd. Batav. 1757-66. Vol. III.

RACCOLTA DI OPUSCULI SCIENTIFICI, &c., dal Padre Calogera. Venezia,
1728-57.

THE WHOLE DUTY OF A CHRISTIAN, by Way of Question and Answer: designed
for the Use of Charity Schools. By Robert Nelson, 1718.

QUARTERLY REVIEW. Nos. 153. to 166., both inclusive.

BELL'S FUGITIVE POETRY COLLECTION. Vols. X. and XVI. 12mo. 1790.

THE CRITIC, London Literary Journal. First 6 Nos. for 1851.

VOLTAIRE, OEUVRES COMPLETES DE. Aux Deux-Ponts. Chez Sanson et
Compagnie. Vols. I. & II. 1791-2.

SCOTT'S CONTINUATION OF MILNER'S CHURCH HISTORY. Part II. of Vol. II.
8vo.

SPECTATOR. No. 1223. Dec. 6, 1851.

EDWIN AND EMMA. Taylor, 1776.

ANNUAL REGISTER, from 1816 inclusive to the present time.

MEDICO-CHIRURGICAL TRANSACTIONS. From Part II. of Vol. XI. March, 1819;
and also from Vol. XXX.

THE CODE MATRIMONIAL. Paris, 1770.

PRO MATRIMONIO PRINCIPIS CUM DEFUNCTÆ UXORIS SORORE CONTRACTO RESPONSUM
JURIS, COLLEGII JURISCONSULTORUM IN ACADEMIA RINTELENSI. Published about
1655.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

_We are this week compelled to omit our usual_ Notices of Books, &c.

_Among other interesting communications which we are this week compelled
to postpone from want of room, is one of great interest from the_ KNIGHT
OF KERRY, _on the portrait in his possession of the Old Countess of
Desmond; one by_ LORD BRAYBROOKE _on the celebrated interview between
Bonaparte and Lord Whitworth; and Archbishop Laud's Notes on Prynne's
Breviate._

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Epitaph on Voltaire--Meaning of Blaen--Music
by Handel--Plague Stones--George Trout--Title of Reverend--King's
College Chapel--Cromwell's Skull--Song of "Miss Bailey"--Macaronic
Poetry--Story of Ginevra--Sir E. Seaward's Narrative--Arms
of Manchester--Fern Seed, &c.--"Man proposes," &c.--Mispronounced
Names of Places--Palace of Lucifer--Alecknegate--Bigot--White
Feather--Ballad of Lord Delamere--Old Scots March--Maps of
Africa--St. Paul and the Heathen Writers--"Wise above that which is
written"--Paring the Nails--Rev. John Paget--History of Commerce--London
Street Characters--Great Bowyer Bible--Wiclif, Orthography of--Ancient
Trees--Game of Curling--Family Likenesses--English Translation of the
Canons--Quotations wanted--Ecclesiastical Geography._

H. T. H. _Queries respecting Irish Antiquities are quite within the
province of_ "N. & Q."

MAY MARRIAGES. CONSTANT READER _is referred to our_ Second Volume, p.
52., _for an answer to his Query upon this subject._

COMBE'S WORKS. _We have received an obliging Note from_ MR. COLE, _in
which he informs us that the List of Combe's Works referred to in_ The
Athenæum _and_ "N. & Q." (Vol. v., p. 194.), _has been placed by him at
the service of the_ Gentleman's Magazine, _and will probably appear in
the April Number of that Journal._

MONASTIC ESTABLISHMENTS IN SCOTLAND. CEYREP _will feel obliged by the
transcript of the List of these Establishments contained in Cardonnel,
so kindly offered by_ M. S. _at_ p. 189.

H. W. _The proper line is_--

      "When Greeks join Greeks then is the tug of war."

_It is from Lee's_ Alexander the Great.

E. N. _The Epigram beginning "Cum sapiente Pius" has already appeared in
our columns. See_ Vol. ii., p. 461.

C. W. G. _and_ W. COLLYNS. _The communications sent to us for these
gentlemen have been duly forwarded._

F. CROSSLEY. _Will this correspondent say how we may forward a letter to
him?_

CHARLEMAGNE'S MAGIC RING. E. A. S. _will find the history of this
curious relic in our First Volume_, pp. 140. and 187.

_Full price will be given for clean copies of_ No. 19. _upon application
to our Publisher._

_Neat Cases for holding the Numbers of_ "N. & Q." _until the completion
of each Volume are now ready, price 1s. 6d., and may be had_ by order
_of all booksellers and newsmen._

VOLUME THE FOURTH OF NOTES AND QUERIES, _with very copious_ INDEX, _is
now ready, price 9s. 6d. cloth boards._

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them
to their Subscribers on the Saturday._




TOMB OF THE TRADESCANTS.

  In Lambeth Churchyard is a Monument, once handsome and elaborately
  carved, which was erected in 1662 by the widow of JOHN TRADESCANT
  the younger, to the memory of her father-in-law, her husband, and
  her son, who were inhabitants of that parish.

  The Monument of the TRADESCANTS, which was repaired by public
  subscription in 1773, has now again fallen into decay. The
  inscription also on the stone that covers ASHMOLE'S grave, who was
  himself buried in Lambeth Church, is now very nearly effaced. The
  restoration of that Church, now nearly finished, seems a fit
  occasion for repairing both these Monuments. It is therefore
  proposed to raise a fund for the perfect restoration of the Tomb
  of the TRADESCANTS, according to its original form, as represented
  in two drawings preserved in the Pepysian Library at Cambridge,
  and also for renewing ASHMOLE'S epitaph. The cost will not be less
  than 100_l._, and assistance is earnestly requested from all who
  are anxious to preserve ancient monuments, especially those who
  are following the same pursuits as the TRADESCANTS, and who are
  daily deriving benefit and delight from the labours and
  discoveries of these first of English gardeners and naturalists.

  Contributions may be paid to,

  Sir William J. Hooker, K.H., &c. &c., Royal Gardens, Kew.

  Sir Charles G. Young, Garter.

  James Forbes Young, Esq., M.D., Lambeth.

  Philip Bury Duncan, Esq., Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.

  The Rev. C. B. Dalton, Rectory, Lambeth.

  Or to Messrs. Reeve, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden; Messrs. Van
  Voorst, Paternoster Row; Mr. Pamplin, Frith Street, Soho; or to
  the Old Bank, Oxford.


CHEAP TEA and CHEAP COFFEE.--Although we sell black tea at 3_s._ per
lb., and good black tea at 3_s._ 4_d._, strong coffee at 10_d._, and
fine coffee at 1_s._ per lb., we still say to all who study economy,
that the best is the cheapest, particularly when the best can be
obtained from us at the following prices:--The best congou tea, 3_s._
8_d._ per lb.; the best souchong tea, 4_s._ 4_d._; the best gunpowder
tea, 5_s._ 8_d._ per lb.: the best old mocha coffee, 1_s._ 4_d._ per
lb.; the best West India coffee, 1_s._ 4_d._ per lb. The fine, true,
ripe, rich, rare souchong tea is now only 4_s._ per lb.; and the pure,
rich, rare gunpowder, 5_s._ per lb. Tea or coffee to the value of 40_s._
sent carriage free to any part of England, by PHILLIPS and Co., Tea
Merchants, 8. King William Street, City.


NOTICE.--The BRITISH MUSEUM and WEEK BOOK OF FACTS, a New Periodical,
devoted to SCIENCE, ART, and GENERAL KNOWLEDGE, and a medium of
inter-communication for Naturalists, Geologists, Electricians,
Meteorologists, &c. &c., was published on Saturday, the 13th Instant,
uniform with the "Illustrated News," eight pages, price 3_d._; stamped
4_d._: yearly subscription, 12_s._ 6_d._; free by post, 17_s._
Advertisements and subscriptions received by all Newsvenders, and at the
OFFICE, THANET PLACE, TEMPLE BAR, where prospectuses may be obtained,
and Advertisements received.


Just published, fcap. 8vo., cloth, price 6_s._,

  SERMONS, on the Doctrines and Means of Grace, and on the Seven
  Words from the Cross. By GEORGE TREVOR, M.A., Canon of York.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


TO BOOK COLLECTORS, ANTIQUARIANS, AND HISTORIANS.

  Now ready (in 8vo., pp. 124.), price 1_s._, or forwarded per post,
  1_s._ 6_d._

  BIBLIOTHECA SELECTA, CURIOSA ET RARISSIMA.

  CATALOGUE of an Interesting Collection of Miscellaneous English
  and Foreign Books, chiefly in fine condition, now on sale for
  ready money, by THOMAS GEORGE STEVENSON, Antiquarian and
  Historical Bookseller, 87. Prince's Street, Edinburgh. (Second
  door west of the New Club.)

    "Whose shop is well-known, or ought to be so, by all the true
    lovers of curious little old smoke-dried volumes."--Chambers'
    _Illustrations of the Author of Waverley_.

    "This shop is now, I believe, the only existing 'cask' in this
    city which preserves the true ancient Wynkyn de Worde
    'odour.'"--Dr. Dibdin's _Tour through Scotland_, vol. ii. p.
    563.


MR. EGESTORFF, translator of Klopstock's "Messiah," &c., respectfully
announces that he is prepared to deliver the following Course of
Lectures, publicly or privatim:--

  1. A Lecture on the Gradual and Ruinous Progress of Inordinate
  Ambition, till its hapless votary becomes involved in a manner
  that leaves him no alternative but to plunge into
  crime,--exemplified in Schiller's "Wallenstein," with Introductory
  Remarks on Literary Institutions, how to be improved, and Remarks
  on National Intercourse.

  2. A Lecture on the Dangerous Tendency of Enthusiasm if not
  controuled by Reason, exemplified in Schiller's "Maid of Orleans."

  3. 4. 5. Lectures on Klopstock's "Messiah."

  6. A Lecture on Music, with a Selection of Classical Airs from the
  German Opera.

  5. BELGRAVE ROAD, PIMLICO, LONDON.


NEW WORKS.

  DR. W. SMITH'S DICTIONARY of GREEK and ROMAN GEOGRAPHY. By various
  Writers. Illustrated with Coins, Plans of Cities, Districts, and
  Battles, &c. To appear in Quarterly Parts, and to form One Volume
  medium 8vo. Part I. 4_s._

  [Star symbol] Part II. on the 1st of April.

  NIEBUHR'S LECTURES on ANCIENT HISTORY; comprising History of the
  Asiatic Nations, the Egyptians, Greeks, Carthaginians, and
  Macedonians. Translated from the German by Dr. L. SCHMITZ. With
  Additions from MSS. in the exclusive possession of the Editor.

  3 vols. 8vo.     [In April.

  REGAL ROME. An Introduction to ROMAN HISTORY. By F. W. NEWMAN,
  Professor of Latin in University College, London. Post 8vo. 5_s._
  6_d._

  DR. R. G. LATHAM'S GERMANIA of TACITUS; with ETHNOLOGICAL
  DISSERTATIONS and NOTES. Demy 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

  A HANDBOOK of ORGANIC CHEMISTRY; being a new and greatly enlarged
  Edition of the "Outlines of Chemistry for the Use of Students." By
  WM. GREGORY, M.D., F.R.S.E., Professor of Chemistry in the
  University of Edinburgh.

      Large 12mo.         [Just ready.

  London: TAYLOR, WALTON, and MABERLY, 28. Upper Gower Street; and
  at 27. Ivy Lane.


Bohn's Standard Library for April

  SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS' LITERARY WORKS, with Memoir of the Author, by
  H. WILLIAM BEECHEY. In two volumes. Vol. II. Price 3_s._ 6_d._

  HENRY G. BOHN, 4, 5, & 6. York Street, Covent Garden.


Bohn's Classical Library for April.

  CICERO'S ORATIONS, literally translated by C. D. YONGE, M.A. Vol.
  III. containing ORATIONS FOR HIS HOUSE, PLANCIUS, SEXTIUS,
  COELIUS, MILO, LIGARIUS, &c. Post 8vo. 5_s._

  HENRY G. BOHN, 4, 5, & 6. York Street, Covent Garden.


Bohn's Antiquarian Library for April.

  SIR THOMAS BROWNE'S WORKS, edited by S. WILKIN, F.L.S. In three
  volumes. Vol. III. Post 8vo. cloth, 5_s._

  HENRY G. BOHN, 4, 5, and 6. York Street, Covent Garden.


Bohn's Scientific Library for April.

  OERSTED'S SOUL IN NATURE, and other Works, translated by the
  MISSES HORNER. Post 8vo. Portrait. 5_s._

  HENRY G. BOHN, 4, 5, & 6. York Street, Covent Garden.


Bohn's Scientific Library for April.

  THE CHESS TOURNAMENT, edited by H. STAUNTON, Esq. With numerous
  illustrative Diagrams. Post 8vo. 5_s._

  HENRY G. BOHN, 4, 5, and 6, York Street, Covent Garden.


PROVIDENT LIFE OFFICE, 50. REGENT STREET.

  CITY BRANCH: 2. ROYAL EXCHANGE BUILDINGS.

      Established 1806.
      Policy Holders' Capital, 1,192,818_l._
      Annual Income, 150,000_l._--Bonuses Declared, 743,000_l._
      Claims paid since the Establishment of the Office, 2,001,450_l._

      _President._
      The Right Honourable EARL GREY.

      _Directors._
      The Rev. James Sherman, _Chairman_.
      H. Blencowe Churchill, Esq., _Dep.-Chairman_.
      Henry B. Alexander, Esq.
      George Dacre, Esq.
      William Judd, Esq.
      Sir Richard D. King, Bart.
      The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird
      Thomas Maugham, Esq.
      William Ostler, Esq.
      Apsley Pellatt, Esq.
      George Round, Esq.
      Frederick Squire, Esq.
      William Henry Stone, Esq.
      Capt. William John Williams.
      J. A. Beaumont, Esq., _Managing Director_.
      _Physician_--John Maclean, M.D. F.S.S., 29 Upper Montague
      Street, Montague Square.

  NINETEEN-TWENTIETHS OF THE PROFITS ARE DIVIDED AMONG THE INSURED.

  Examples of the Extinction of Premiums by the Surrender of
  Bonuses.

      -------------------------------------------------------
             |        |                 | Bonuses
        Date |        |                 |added subsequently,
         of  |  Sum   |    Original     | to be further
      Policy.|Insured.|    Premium.     | increased
             |        |                 | annually.
             |        |                 |
      -------|--------|-----------------|--------------------
       1806  | 2500   |£79 10 10 Exting.|£1222  2  8
       1811  | 1000   | 33 19  2  Ditto |  231 17  0
       1818  | 1000   | 34 16 10  Ditto |  114 18 10
      -------------------------------------------------------

  Examples of Bonuses added to other Policies.

      --------------------------------------------------
             |        |         |          | Total with
             |        |         |          | Additions
      Policy |  Date. |   Sum   | Bonuses  | to be further
        No.  |        | Insured.|  added.  | increased.
             |        |         |          |
      -------|--------|---------|----------|------------
        521  |  1807  |  £900   |£982 12 1 | £1882 12 1
       1174  |  1810  |  1200   |1160  5 6 |  2360  5 6
       3392  |  1820  |  5000   |3558 17 8 |  8558 17 8
      --------------------------------------------------

  Prospectuses and full particulars may be obtained upon application
  to the Agents of the Office, in all the principal Towns of the
  United Kingdom, at the City Branch, and at the Head Office, No.
  50. Regent Street.


INTERESTING CUTTINGS FROM ANCIENT NEWSPAPERS, GAZETTES, MAGAZINES, &c.,
illustrative of the following English Counties, may be had of MR. JAMES
FENNELL, 1. WARWICK COURT, HOLBORN, LONDON, immediately upon the receipt
of a remittance for the prices here stated, viz.: BUCKINGHAMSHIRE
CUTTINGS (A.D. 1681 to 1838), various old Views and other Prints, some
rare, the entire parcel only 16_s._ 6_d._; DORSETSHIRE CUTTINGS (1748 to
1838), Adventures of a Dorsetshire Corporal (1756), some scarce Views,
6_s._ 6_d._; DURHAM CUTTINGS (1749 to 1800), several Views, &c. some
rare, Moule's Topography of the County, with Map, the entire parcel only
1_l._ 1_s._; ESSEX CUTTINGS (1680 to 1850), several old Views of Abbeys,
Churches, &c., some scarce, curious Tract on Colchester Marriages, and
other articles, the whole lot only 1_l._ 1_s._; GLOUCESTERSHIRE CUTTINGS
(1680 to 1838), some scarce Prints, old Gloucester and Cheltenham
Play-bills &c., 1_l._; HAMPSHIRE CUTTINGS (1679 to 1846), old
Southampton Play-bills, Moule's Topography, Views, and Map, 17_s._
6_d._; HEREFORDSHIRE CUTTINGS (1724 to 1799), old Views, &c., 6_s._;
HERTFORDSHIRE CUTTINGS (1679 to 1836), some rare Prints, and Map, 1_l._
1_s._; Huntingdon Cuttings (1681 to 1776), curious and old Tracts, Maps,
&c., 5_s._ 6_d._ [See "NOTES & QUERIES," No. 124. for other Counties].


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY

      3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.
      Founded A.D. 1842.
      _Directors._
      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.
      _Trustees._
      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.
     _Consulting Counsel._--Sir Wm. P. Wood, M.P. Solicitor-General.
     _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.
     _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co. Charing Cross.

     VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._ with a Share in
  three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age     £ s. d.
       17     1 14 4
       22     1 18 8
       27     2  4 5
       32     2 10 8
       37     2 18 6
       42     3  8 2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


RECENT PUBLICATIONS OF THE SURTEES SOCIETY.

  THE INJUNCTIONS and other ECCLESIASTICAL PROCEEDINGS of RICHARD
  BARNES, BISHOP of DURHAM, from 1575 to 1587. Edited by the Rev.
  JAMES RAINE, M.A. 8vo. 25_s._

  THE LATIN HYMNS of the ANGLO-SAXON CHURCH, with an Interlinear
  Anglo-Saxon Gloss; derived chiefly from a Manuscript of the
  Eleventh Century, preserved in the Library of the Dean and Chapter
  of Durham. Edited by the Rev. JOSEPH STEVENSON, M.A. 8vo. 25_s._

  Published for the Society by

  GEORGE ANDREWS, Durham; WHITTAKER & CO., 13. Ave Maria Lane, T.
  and W. BOONE, 29. New Bond Street, London; And WM. BLACKWOOD &
  SONS, Edinburgh.

  [Star symbol] A complete List of the Publications of the Surtees
  Society may be had of GEORGE ANDREWS, Bookseller, Durham.


THREE THOUSAND SCARCE, USEFUL, and VALUABLE BOOKS, in all Departments of
Literature, will be found in the First Quarterly Part for 1852 of
MILLER'S LONDON LIBRARIAN, ready this day, and forwarded (postage free
on receipt of Four Penny Postage Stamps) to all applications. Also the
current Number for March, just published, "gratis," as usual, to
Book-buyers.

  JOHN MILLER, 43. Chandos-Street, Trafalgar Square.


Books recently printed at the

  UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD.

  FASTI TEMPORIS CATHOLICI AND ORIGINES KALENDARIÆ. By EDWARD
  GRESWELL, B.D., Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. 5 vols.
  8vo. and a quarto volume of Tables. Price 3_l._ 5_s._ in boards.

  An EPITOME of the Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece, from
  the earliest Accounts to the Death of Augustus. By HENRY FYNES
  CLINTON, Esq., M.A., late Student of Christ Church. 8vo. Price
  6_s._ 6_d._ in boards.

  FASTI HELLENICI. The Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece and
  Rome, from the CXXIVth Olympiad to the Death of Augustus. By HENRY
  FYNES CLINTON, Esq., M.A., late Student of Christ Church. Second
  Edition, with additions. 4to. Price 1_l._ 12_s._ in boards.

  CATALOGUS CODICUM MSS. Qui in Collegiis Aulisque Oxoniensibus
  hodie adservantur. Confecit HENRICUS O. COXE, A.M., Bibliothecæ
  Bodleianæ Hypo-Bibliothecarius. 2 vols. 4to. Price 2_l._ 4_s._ in
  boards.

  THE MEMOIRS of the Lives and Actions of James and William dukes of
  Hamilton and Castle-Herald. By GILBERT BURNET, late Lord Bishop of
  Salisbury. A new edition. 8vo. Price 7_s._ 6_d._ in boards.

  THE LIFE of JAMES DUKE of ORMOND; containing an account of the
  most remarkable affairs of his time, and particularly of Ireland
  under his government: with an Appendix and a Collection of
  Letters, serving to verify the most material facts in the said
  History. A new Edition, carefully compared with the original MSS.
  6 vols. 8vo. Price 2_l._ 6_s._ in boards.

  PROPHETAE MAJORES, in Dialecto Linguae Aegyptiacae Memphitica seu
  Coptica. Edidit cum Versione Latina HENRICUS TATTAM, S.T.P. 2
  vols. 8vo. Price 17_s._ in boards.

  A LEXICON abridged from the Greek-English Lexicon of H. G.
  LIDDELL, M.A., and R. SCOTT, M.A. The Fourth Edition. 18mo. Price
  7_s._ in boards or 8_s._ bound.

  Sold by JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford; and 377. Strand, London; and E.
  GARDNER, 7. Paternoster Row, London.


Now Ready, Second Edition, 1_s._; by post 1_s._ 6_d._

  WELSH SKETCHES (chiefly Ecclesiastical) to the close of the
  Twelfth Century. By the Author of "Proposals for Christian Union."

    "A refreshing little work, full of information relative to the
    early history of Wales, entirely free from
    prejudice."--_Archæologia Cambrensis._

    "He must be a men of no taste for pleasant reading, who, once he
    picks up these Sketches, can lay them down unread or unadmired.
    The author says he is not a Welshman; still few indeed can
    display a greater veneration for all that is great, good, and
    exalted in the character of our countrymen. Had he been a
    veritable John Jones, he could not have shown a warmer heart for
    Wales and Welshmen."--_North Wales Chronicle._

  London: JAMES DARLING, Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields.


THOMAS MOORE'S WORKS.

  POETICAL WORKS. With Autobiographical Prefaces and Notes. Complete
  in One Volume, with Portrait and Vignette. Medium 8vo. One Guinea;
  or bound in morocco, by Hayday, 42_s._

  Also, an Edition of the above in 10 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Portrait
  and 19 Plates, 50_s._ cloth; morocco, 4_l._ 10_s._

  LALLA ROOKH. Various Editions:--

  1. Uniform with Mr. Macaulay's "Lays of Ancient Rome;" with
  Vignette by D. Maclise, R.A. 16mo. 5_s._; morocco, by Hayday,
  12_s._ 6_d._

  2. Illustrated by Corbould, Meadows, Stephanoff; with 13 Plates,
  engraved under the superintendence of the late Charles Heath. Sq.
  crown 8vo. 15_s._; morocco, 28_s._

  3. Large Paper Edition of the above, in royal 8vo. price One
  Guinea, cloth; 35_s._ morocco; India Proofs, 42_s._ cloth.

  IRISH MELODIES. Various Editions:--

  1. Uniformly with Mr. Macaulay's "Lays of Ancient Rome;" with
  Vignette by D. Maclise, R.A. 16mo. 5_s._; morocco, by Hayday,
  12_s._ 6_d._

  2. With Vignette from a Design by E. Corbould. Fcp. 8vo. 10_s._;
  morocco, 13_s._ 6_d._

  3. Illustrated by D. Maclise. R.A.; with 161 Designs and the whole
  of the Letter-press engraved on Steel. Super-royal 8vo. 31_s._
  6_d._; morocco, 52_s._ 6_d._

  4. Large Paper Edition of the above, in imperial 8vo. price 63_s._
  boards; morocco, 4_l._ 14_s._ 6_d._; Proofs, 6_l._ 6_s._ bds.

  SONGS, BALLADS, and SACRED SONGS. First collected Edition; with
  Vignette by R. Doyle. 16mo. 5_s._; morocco, by Hayday, 12_s._
  6_d._

  THE HISTORY OF IRELAND, from the earliest Kings of that Realm,
  down to its last Chief. 4 vols. fcp. 8vo. with Vignette Titles,
  14_s._

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMAN.


NEW WORK BY MRS. C. L. BALFOUR.

  Just published, in 1 vol. fcp. 8vo. price 7_s._ cloth.

  SKETCHES Of ENGLISH LITERATURE from the Fourteenth to the Present
  Century. By CLARA LUCAS BALFOUR. Author of "Women of Scripture,"
  "Moral Heroism," &c.

    "We know of no book of the same size which gives so clear and
    satisfactory an account of the progress of English literature, or
    is so well calculated to promote a love of reading and a taste
    for the writings of our best authors."--_Morning Post._

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.


Just published, in fcp. 8vo. price 7_s._ 6_d._ cloth.

  HISTORICAL SKETCHES; illustrating some Memorable Events and
  Epochs, from A.D. 1400 to A.D. 1546. By the Rev. J.H. GURNEY,
  M.A., Rector of St. Mary's, Mary-le-bone.

  [Star symbol] This work contains Memoirs of Joan of Arc, Caxton
  and the early Printers, Columbus, and Luther with an Introductory
  Chapter to each Memoir relating to the History of the Period,
  adapted to young readers.

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN and LONGMANS.


LECTURES BY THE EARL OF CARLISLE.

  On Wednesday next will be published, 16mo. price One Shilling,

  LECTURES and ADDRESSES in aid of Popular Education: Including a
  Lecture on the Poetry of Pope, and on Lord Carlisle's Travels in
  America. By the Right Hon. the EARL OF CARLISLE. Forming the
  Eighteenth Part of "The Traveller's Library."

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.


NEW PART OF COSMOS.

  The Authorised translation.

  Just published, in post 8vo. price 7_s._ cloth; and in 16mo. price
  3_s._ sewed, or 4_s._ cloth, the Second Part of the Third Volume
  of

  HUMBOLDT'S COSMOS. Translated with the Author's sanction and
  co-operation, and at his express desire, by COLONEL and MRS.
  SABINE.

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS; JOHN MURRAY,
  Albemarle Street.


NEW MEDICAL DICTIONARY FOR THE PEOPLE.

  In Monthly Parts, price 6_d._, to be completed in 12. Parts 1, 2,
  and 3 are published.

  THE DICTIONARY of DOMESTIC MEDICINE and HOUSEHOLD SURGERY. By
  SPENCER THOMSON, M.D., L.R.C.S., Edinburgh. Illustrated.

  This work is intended to be a concise and ready book of reference
  in cases of emergency, either of severe illness or accident, in
  the absence of immediate medical assistance, and a safe guide in
  the domestic management of slight ailments, and of the sick room
  generally. Also a compendium of those sanitary principles on which
  the attainment and preservation of health depends. It is the book
  of the intelligent mechanic, of the inexperienced mother, of the
  clergyman, and of the emigrant.

    "It is most clear and copious; and if continued, as it has begun,
    will prove the most valuable periodical of the year."--_Tait's
    Magazine._

    "For families and for the clergy, it will be a valuable
    guide."--_Oxford Herald._

    "Intended for all classes, and giving a promise of undoubted
    excellence."--_Newcastle Guardian._

  London: GROOMBRIDGE & SONS, Paternoster Row. Sold by all Booksellers.


Now ready, in 7 vols. 8vo. cloth, price 31_s._ 6_d._

  THE Former Series (comprising Parts I. to XIV. inclusive) of the
  JOURNAL of SACRED LITERATURE, edited by the Rev. DR. KITTO, F.S.A.

  [Star symbol] As the Work will now be made up into complete sets,
  immediate application should be made for odd numbers.

  ROBERT B. BLACKADER, 13. Paternoster Row; and SAMUEL BAGSTER &
  SONS, 15. Paternoster Row.


Demy 8vo., with fac-simile signatures, cloth, 3_s._; by post, 3_s._
6_d._

  WERE "HERETICS" EVER BURNED ALIVE at ROME? A Report of the
  Proceedings in the ROMAN INQUISITION against FULGENTIO MANFREDI;
  taken from the original Manuscript brought from Italy by a French
  Officer, and edited, with a parallel English Version, and
  illustrative Additions, by the Rev. RICHARD GIBBINGS, M.A., Author
  of "Roman Forgeries and Falsifications," &c.

  JOHN PETHERAM, 94. High Holborn.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, March 27, 1852.




      [Transcriber's Note: List of volumes and content pages in "Notes
      and Queries", Vol. I.-V.]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  88 | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No.  89 | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No.  90 | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No.  91 | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  92 | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No.  93 | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No.  94 | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No.  95 | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No.  96 | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      | Vol. IV No. 111 | Dec. 13, 1851      | 465-478 | PG # 39393 |
      | Vol. IV No. 112 | Dec. 20, 1851      | 481-494 | PG # 39438 |
      | Vol. IV No. 113 | Dec. 27, 1851      | 497-510 | PG # 39503 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. V.                                   |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         |  Pages  | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 114 | January  3, 1852   |   1- 18 | PG # 40171 |
      | Vol. V  No. 115 | January 10, 1852   |  25- 45 | PG # 40582 |
      | Vol. V  No. 116 | January 17, 1852   |  49- 70 | PG # 40642 |
      | Vol. V  No. 117 | January 24, 1852   |  73- 94 | PG # 40678 |
      | Vol. V  No. 118 | January 31, 1852   |  97-118 | PG # 40716 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 119 | February  7, 1852  | 121-142 | PG # 40742 |
      | Vol. V  No. 120 | February 14, 1852  | 145-167 | PG # 40743 |
      | Vol. V  No. 121 | February 21, 1852  | 170-191 | PG # 40773 |
      | Vol. V  No. 122 | February 28, 1852  | 193-215 | PG # 40779 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 123 | March  6, 1852     | 217-239 | PG # 40804 |
      | Vol. V  No. 124 | March 13, 1852     | 241-263 | PG # 40843 |
      | Vol. V  No. 125 | March 20, 1852     | 265-287 | PG # 40910 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      | INDEX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME. JULY-DEC., 1851    | PG # 40166 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 126,
March 27, 1852, by Various

